COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES



Brussels, 30.1.2002 
COM(2002) 43 final 

2001/0122 (CNS) 
2001/0123 (CNS) 
2001/0124 (CNS) 
2001/0125 (CNS) 
2001/0126 (CNS) 

Amended proposals for 

COUNCIL DECISIONS 

concerning the specific programmes implementing the Sixth Framework Programme 
2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technological development and 
demonstration activities 

(2002-2006) 

concerning the specific programmes implementing the Sixth Framework Programme 
2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community for research and training 
activities 

(2002-2006) 

(Amendements are indicated by underlining/strikeout in the text) 

(presented by the Commission pursuant to Article 250 (2) of the EC Treaty) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Explanatory Memorandum 

Amended specific Programmes 2002-2006 (EC) 

1. Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area (as previously amended) 
2. Structuring the European Research Area 
3. Joint Research Centre activities (EC) 
Amended specific Programmes 2002-2006 (Euratom) 
1. Nuclear energy 
2. Joint Research Centre activities (Euratom) 
2



EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM


The Commission adopted its proposals for the sixth framework programme (EC and 
Euratom)1 for research and technology development, on 21 February 2001, and for the 
specific programmes to implement the sixth framework programme2, on 30 May 2001. These 
proposals have been designed with the objective of contributing to the creation of the 
European Research Area. 

A key stage in the process of negotiation on the framework programme Decisions has now 
been accomplished, with the first reading of the European Parliament (14 November 2001) 
and the adoption of a common position by Council (28 January 2002). 

The positions expressed by Parliament and Council on the new framework programme 
demonstrate a high degree of convergence, with broadly similar positions expressed on the 
overall budget and its breakdown, programme structure, scientific and technological priorities, 
and means of implementation. 

For its part, the Commission has worked to encourage the process of convergence, in 
particular by modifying its framework programme proposals to take up a significant 
proportion of Parliament’s amendments3. It notes with satisfaction the substantial consensus 
on the underlying principles of the new framework programme that has been achieved 
through the efforts of Council and Parliament, in particular with respect to the priority to be 
given to the use of powerful new instruments, the strong focus of the thematic priorities, and 
the introduction of greater flexibility in the implementation of the programme. 

A sufficiently stable basis now exists for the Commission to come forward with amended 
proposals for the specific programmes. These take up the changes in the framework 
programme resulting from the first reading, and set out their detailed implications as regards 
the research to be conducted and its means of implementation. The objective is to assist the 
other institutions in their examination of the specific programmes, and their further 
negotiations, with the aim of reaching early agreement on the framework programme, rules of 
participation and specific programmes. 

The most extensive adjustments to the Commission’s earlier proposals are to be found in the 
programme “Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area”, including the 
following: 

– Adaptations to the structure and detailed research content of thematic priority 1 (to 
reflect its organisation in two sections, respectively on advanced genomics and its 
applications to health,and on combating major diseases) and thematic priority 6 (to 
reflect its organisation in three parts, respectively on sustainable energy systems, 
sustainable surface transport,and global change and ecosystems). More limited, but 
in some cases nevertheless substantial, amendments have been introduced in to the 
research content of other priority thematic areas. 
1 

COM(2001)94 

2 

COM(2001)279 

3 

COM(2001)709 

3



– Adjustments to the initial policy-orientated research priorities under the heading 
“supporting policies and anticipating scientific and technological needs”, along with 
some re-attribution of research activities in relation to the thematic priorities (notably 
as regards agriculture and marine ecosystem research). These take account of the 
modifications to content and the significant reduction in budget introduced following 
the first reading. 
– The description of the instruments (Annex III) has been refined and clarified, in the 
light of the debate leading up to the first reading. This reflects the principle of a 
smooth transition from “traditional” to “new” instruments in the implementation of 
the thematic priority areas, and the idea of a fourth instrument, in the spirit of the 
“escalier d’excellence”. 
In implementing this specific programme, the Commission proposes to be assisted by a 
committee of Member States’ representatives. The committee shall meet in different 
configurations, as appropriate, corresponding to the thematic priority areas of research. 

The modifications introduced in the programme “Structuring the European research area” 
relate mainly to the mobility and infrastructure actions, where additional detail and clarity has 
been introduced in the mechanisms and instruments to be adopted, while also taking account 
of the more limited budget attributed to these actions. As regards the Euratom programme on 
“Nuclear energy”, the main changes relate to the fission part, with the introduction of a new 
thematic priority on radiation protection and activities on the safety of nuclear installations. In 
both these programmes, the descriptions of the instruments (Annex III) have been 
substantially updated, in line with the programme “Integrating and strengthening the 
European Research Area”. 

In all cases, the budgetary allocations have been revised in conformity with the common 
position of the Council. 

4



Amended proposal for a 

COUNCIL DECISION 

adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research, 

technological development and demonstration. aimed at 

“Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area” 

(2002-2006) 

(as previously amended4) 

COM(2001)594 final, 17.10.2001 

5



2001/0122 (CNS) 

Amended proposal for a 

COUNCIL DECISION 

adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research, technological development and 

demonstration: aimed at “Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area” 

(2002-2006) 

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 
166 thereof, 

Having regard to the proposal from the Commission5 

Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament6 

Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee7 

Whereas: 

(1) In accordance with Article 166(3) of the Treaty, Decision No. …/../EC8 of the 
European Parliament and the Council concerning the sixth multiannual framework 
programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technological 
development and demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation 
of the European Research Area (hereinafter referred to as "the framework 
programme") is to be implemented through specific programmes that define detailed 
rules for their implementation, fix their duration and provide for the means deemed 
necessary. 
(2) The framework programme is structured in three main blocks of activities, “Focusing 
and integrating Community research”, “structuring the European Research Area”, 
and “strengthening the foundations of the European Research Area”, the first and the 
third of which, as regards indirect actions, should be implemented by this specific 
programme. 
(3) The rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities and 
for the dissemination of research results, for the framework programme, adopted by 
5 

OJ No. 

6 

OJ No. 

7 

OJ No. 

8 

OJ No. 

6



the European Parliament and Council in Decision No. …/../EC9 (hereinafter referred to 
as "the rules for participation and dissemination") should apply to this programme. 
(4) New instruments, involving simplified and decentralised management, and the 
exploitation of external technical support should, if fully exploited in this programme 
The importance of the new instruments (Integrated Projects and Networks of 
Excellence) is recognised as being an overall priority means to attain the 
objectives of critical mass, management simplification and European added value 
contributed by Community research in relation to what is already undertaken at 
national level, and of the integration of the research capacities. They should 
enable personnel and administrative expenses to be reduced to a maximum of 5.5 6.0 
% of the overall amount deemed necessary for it’s the implementation of the 
programme. In 2004 an evaluation will be undertaken by independent experts of 
the efficiency of each of these instruments in the execution of the framework 
programme. 
(5) As provided for under Article 170 of the Treaty, this programme is open to the 
participation of countries having concluded the necessary agreements to this 
effect, and is also open on the project level, and on the basis of mutual benefit, to 
the participation of entities from third countries and of international 
organisations for scientific co-operation. 
(6) In implementing this programme, emphasis should be given to promoting mobility of 
researchers, and following the Commission communication “A mobility strategy 
within the European Research Area”, to innovation,; in the Community to the 
needs of SMEs and encouraging their participation of SMEs,as well as to 
international co-operation activities with third countries and international 
organisations. Special attention should be paid to the Accession candidate countries. 
(7) Research activities carried out within this programme should must respect 
fundamental ethical principles, notably including those which appear in the Charter of 
Fundamental Rights of the European Union; no support will be provided to research 
aimed at military purposes. 
(8) Following the Commission Communication “Women and Science”10 and the 
Resolutions of the Council11 and the European Parliament12 on this theme, an action 
plan is being implemented in order to reinforce and increase the place and role of 
women in science and research, and further enhanced action is needed.Gender 
aspects in research will be taken into account in implementing this programme. 
(9) To achieve the full potential of this programme, the active engagement of all relevant 
parties, in particular the Member States, associated candidate countries and other 
associated states, should be encouraged in a common endeavour to step up the coordination of research activities carried out in Europe, including through the opening 
up and networking of national programmes and the free circulation of information 
pertaining to research activities at all levels. 
9 
10 
11 
12 
OJ No 
COM(1999)76. 
Resolution of 20 May 1999, OJ C 201, 16.7.1999. 
Resolution of 3 February 2000, PE 284.656. 

7



(10) This programme should be implemented in a flexible, efficient and transparent 
manner, taking account of relevant interests, in particular of the scientific, industrial, 
user and policy communities; the research activities carried out under it should be 
adapted where appropriate to the needs of Community policies and to scientific and 
technological developments. 
(11) Participation in the activities of this programme will be encouraged through 
publication of the necessary information on content, conditions and procedures, 
to be made available in a timely and thorough manner to potential participants, 
including those from the associated candidate countries and other associated 
countries. Specific activities will be undertaken in support of participation of 
scientists and institutions from developing countries, Mediterranean countries 
including the Western Balkans as well as Russia and the NIS13. 
(12) Since the measures necessary for the implementation of this Decision are management 
measures within the meaning of Article 2 of Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 
June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers 
conferred on the Commission14, they should be adopted by use of the management 
procedure provided for in Article 4 of that Decision. 
(13) The Commission should will in due course arrange for an independent assessment to 
be conducted concerning the activities carried out in the fields covered by this 
programme, which will be done in a spirit of openness with respect to all the 
relevant actors. 
(14) Within this programme, thematic priority areas of research should be implemented 
exclusively by means of three types of instruments: networks of excellence, integrated 
projects., and Community participation in national research activities implemented 
jointly pursuant to Article 169 of the Treaty. The new instruments will be used from 
the start of the Sixth Framework Programme in each theme and, where deemed 
appropriate, as a priority means, while maintaining the use of specific targeted 
research projects and coordination actions. 
(15) Each thematic priority area should have its own budget line in the General 
Budget of the European Communities. 
HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION 

Article 1 

1. In accordance with the framework programme, a specific programme on Integrating 
and strengthening the European Research Area (hereinafter referred to as "the 
specific programme") is hereby adopted for the period from […..] to 31 December 
2006. 
2. The objectives and scientific and technological priorities for the specific programme 
are set out in Annex I. 
13 

NIS: Newly Independent States. 

14 

OJL 184, 17.7.1999, p.23 

8



Article 2 

In accordance with Annex II of the framework programme, the amount deemed necessary for 
the execution of the specific programme is EUR 12 505 12 855 million, including a maximum 
of 5.5 6.0% for the Commission’s administrative expenditure. An indicative breakdown of 
this amount is given in Annex II. 

Article 3 

All research activities carried out under the specific programme must be carried out in 
compliance with fundamental ethical principles. 

Article 34 

1. The detailed rules for financial participation by the Community in the specific 
programme shall be those referred to in Article 2(2) of the framework programme. 
2. The specific programme shall be implemented by means of the instruments defined 
in Annexes I and III to the framework programme and described in Annex III. 
3. The rules for participation and dissemination shall apply to the specific programme. 
Article 45 

1. The Commission shall draw up a work programme for the implementation of the 
specific programme, setting out in greater detail the objectives and scientific and 
technological priorities set out in Annex I, and the timetable for implementation. 
2. The work programme shall take account of relevant research activities carried out by 
the Member States, Associated States and European and international organisations. 
It shall be updated where appropriate. 
Article 56 

1. The Commission shall be responsible for the implementation of the specific 
programme. 
2. The procedure laid down in Article 6 7 shall apply for the adoption of the following 
measures: 
– the drawing up and updating of the work programme referred to in Article 4 
5(1), including the instruments to be used on a priority basis, and any 
subsequent adjustment to their use; 
– any adjustment to the indicative breakdown of the amount as set out in Annex 
II. 
9



Article 67 

1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee, composed of representatives of 
the Member States and chaired by the representative of the Commission. 
2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, the management procedure laid down in 
Article 4 of Decision 1999/468/EC15 shall apply, in compliance with Article 7 (3) 
thereof. 
3. The period provided for in Article 4(3) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be two 
months. 
Article 78 

1. The Commission shall regularly report on the overall progress of the implementation 
of the specific programme, in accordance with Article 4 of the framework 
programme; information on financial aspects shall be included. 
2. The Commission shall arrange for the independent monitoring and assessment 
provided for in Article 5 6 of the framework programme to be conducted concerning 
the activities carried out in the fields covered by the specific programme. 
Article 89 

This Decision is addressed to the Member States. 

Done at Brussels, 

For the Council 
The President 

OJL 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 

10



ANNEX I


SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL OBJECTIVES AND BROAD LINES OF THE ACTIVITIES 
The programme is structured as follows: 

1. FOCUSING AND INTEGRATING COMMUNITY RESEARCH 
1.1. Priority thematic areas of research 
1.1.1.Genomics and biotechnology for health
i) Advanced genomics and its applications for health.
ii) Combating major diseases.


1.1.2.Information Society technologies 
1.1.3.Nanotechnologies and nanosciences, knowledge-based multifunctional 

materials, and new production processes and devices
1.1.4.Aeronautics and space
1.1.5.Food quality and safety
1.1.6.Sustainable development, global change and ecosystems


i) Sustainable Energy Systems
ii) Sustainable surface transport
iii) Global change and ecosystems


1.1.7.Citizens and governance in a knowledge-based society 

1.2. Specific activities covering a wider field of research 
1.2.1 Supporting policies and anticipating scientific and technological needs 
1.2.2 Horizontal research activities involving SMEs
1.2.3.Specific measures in support of international co-operation
2. STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA 
2.1. Support for the co-ordination of activities 
2.2. Support for the coherent development of policies 
11



Introduction 

This programme will promote world class research in key priority areas of exceptional interest 
and added value to Europe and the competitiveness of its industry, which have been identified 
in the framework programme 2002-2006, as well as on topics that are identified as being of 
high importance during the course of implementation of the framework programme in view of 
the EU’s policy needs and the opportunities arising in novel, leading edge research areas. 

The programme will strive towards greater integration of research in Europe by means of: 

– focused action in priority thematic research areas, using powerful financing 
instruments (integrated projects and networks of excellence) which bring together the 
research actors in appropriate configurations for the new challenges that these 
priority research areas represent, and with critical mass; 
– Systematic and co-ordinated planning and execution of research to support 
Community policies, and to explore new and emerging scientific and 
technological areas, taking account of needs expressed by the relevant actors 
throughout the EU. 
– promoting the networking and joint action of national and European frameworks for 
research and innovation, and the opening up of national programmes, in these 
priority areas, including where appropriate by the use of actions under Article 169 of 
the Treaty, as well as in other areas where such action would be of benefit to the 
performance of Europe’s research base. 
The programme is complementary to the programme “structuring the European Research 
Area” and the specific programme for the JRC, and its implementation will be co-ordinated 
with them. 

International co-operation represents an important dimension of the Framework 
Programme. In this specific programme, international activities are carried out in the 
two forms of: 

– Participation of researchers, teams and institutions from third countries in 
projects within the different thematic priority fields, related to issues arising at 
world level and being subjects of international efforts; 
– Specific international co-operation activities with some groups of countries, as a 
support to Community external relations and development aid policies. 
The objectives and forms of the international co-operation activities in the Framework 
Programme are described under the heading “Specific activities covering a wider field 
of research”. 

Participation of the candidate countries in this programme will be encouraged. 

Participation of small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) will be encouraged and 
gender equity will, overall, be assured in the implementation of the activities. 

12



The activities carried out within the programme will be implemented in an integrated 
fashion to assure coherence and synergy between their various elements and, as 
appropriate, with other parts of the framework programme. 

13



1. Focusing and integrating Community research 
1.1. PRIORITY THEMATIC AREAS OF RESEARCH 
The priority thematic areas represent the bulk of expenditure under the sixth framework 
programme 2002-2006. Through a highly focused Community research effort, the intention is 
to generate a substantial leveraging effect which, together with actions in other parts of the 
framework programme 2002-2006 and through open co-ordination with other – regional, 
national, European and international – frameworks, will result in a coherent and highly 
effective common endeavour towards their overall objectives. 

The priority thematic areas of research are : 

– Genomics and biotechnology for health 
– Information Society technologies 
– Nanotechnologies, intelligent materials and new production processes 
– Aeronautics and space 
– Food Safety and health risks 
– Sustainable development and global change 
– Citizens and Governance in the European Knowledge-based society 
The actions are therefore described in terms of: 

– the overall objectives and expected achievements which are sought in each priority 
area; 
– the research priorities to be pursued by means of Community action. 
The priority thematic areas of research are described in terms of their overall objectives and 
the main research focus. The associated work programme will elaborate further on the 
detailed research content. 

Within the thematic priority areas, the importance of the new instruments (Integrated 
Projects and Networks of Excellence) is recognised as being an overall priority means to 
attain the objectives of critical mass, management simplification and European added 
value contributed by Community research in relation to what is already undertaken at 
national level, and of the integration of the research capacities. 

Networks of excellence and integrated projects will be used from the start of the 
programme Community action in each thematic priority area and, where deemed 
appropriate, as a priority means, while maintaining the use of specific targeted projects 
and co-ordination actions. will be pursued through integrated projects and networks of 
excellence. which, In addition to research and technological development, they may 
incorporate the following types of activity, where they are of specific relevance to the 

14



objectives sought: demonstration, dissemination and exploitation; co-operation with 
researchers and research teams from third countries; human resource development, including 
the promotion of training of researchers; development of research facilities and 
infrastructure of specific relevance to the research being undertaken; and promotion of better 
links between science and society, including women in science. 

Specific targeted research projects and co-ordination actions, giving effect to the concept 
of a stairway of excellence and integration, as well as specific support actions, may also 
be used in the implementation of the thematic priorities. 

In order to attain the objectives of one or more of the priority thematic areas, it may also be 
appropriate to implement research activities falling within the scope of Articles 169 to 171 of 
the Treaty. 

Participation of small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) will be encouraged and gender 
equity will, overall, be assured in the implementation of the activities. 

Innovation is an important dimension which must be taken into account in the design and 
implementation of RTD activities. In particular, networks of excellence and integrated 
projects will include activities relating to dissemination and exploitation of knowledge and, 
where relevant, to ensure transfer of technology and facilitate exploitation of results. Where 
appropriate, special attention will be given to technology transfer to SMEs and to the creation 
of research – based enterprises as a means of exploiting research results. 

Participation of the candidate countries in this programme will be encouraged. 

International co-operation represents an important dimension of the Framework Programme. 
In the specific programme, "Integrating Research", international activities are carried out on 
the two forms of: 

– Participation of researchers, teams and institutions from third countries in networks 
of excellence and integrated projects, in particular on topics, within the different 
thematic priority fields, related to issues arising at world level and being subjects of 
international efforts; 
– Specific international co-operation activities with some groups of countries, as a 
support to Community external relations and development aid policies. 
The objectives and forms of the international co-operation activities in the Framework 
Programme are described under the heading "Anticipating the EU's scientific and 
technological needs" 

The priority research areas include, in certain cases, research at the borders of traditional 
disciplines where advances will require interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary effort. They 
will also each carry out, as appropriate, exploratory research at the leading edge of 
knowledge on subjects closely related to one or more topics within them. Measurement 
and testing aspects will also receive necessary emphasis. In such cases A particular 
attention will be given during the implementation of the programme to the co-ordination 
between the different priority areas, and between these areas and actions under the heading 
“supporting policies and anticipating the EU’s scientific and technological needs”. 

15



The principle of sustainable development, and gender equality, will be duly taken into 
account. Furthermore, consideration of the ethical, social, and legal and wider cultural 
aspects of the research to be undertaken and its potential applications, as well as socioeconomic impacts of scientific and technological development and foresight, will where 
relevant form a part of the activities under this heading. Research on ethics related to 
scientific and technological developments will be carried out in the programme "Structuring 
the European Research Area". 

During the implementation of this programme and in the research activities arising from it, 
fundamental ethical principles are to be respected. These include the principles set out in 
the Charter of fundamental rights of the EU, including the following: protection of human 
dignity and human life, protection of personal data and privacy, as well as animals and the 
environment in accordance with Community law and relevant international conventions and 
codes of conduct, e.g. the Helsinki Declaration in its latest version, the Convention of the 
Council of Europe on Human Rights and Biomedicine signed in Oviedo on 4 April 1997, 
and the Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings signed in Paris 
on 12 January 1998, the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Universal 
Declaration on the human genome and human rights adopted by UNESCO, and the relevant 
World Health Organisation (WHO)resolutions. 

Account will also be taken to the opinions of the European Group of Advisers on the 
Ethical Implications of Biotechnology ( 1991 –1997) and the opinions of the European 
Group on Ethics in Science and New technologies( as from 1998) 

Participants in research projects must conform to current legislation and regulations in the 
countries where the research will be carried out. Where appropriate, participants in research 
projects must seek the approval of the relevant ethics committees prior to the start of the RTD 
activities. An ethical review will be implemented systematically for proposals dealing with 
sensitive issues. In specific cases, an ethical review may take place during the implementation 
of a project. 

The following fields of research shall not be financed under this programme: 

– research activity aiming at human cloning for reproductive purposes; 
– research activity intended to modify the genetic heritage of human beings which 
could make such changes heritable16; 
– research activities intended to create human embryos solely for the purpose of 
research or for the purpose of stem cell procurement, including by means of 
somatic cell nuclear transfer. 
In accordance with the Amsterdam protocol on animal protection and welfare, animal 
experiments must be replaced with alternatives wherever possible. Suffering by animals 
must be avoided or kept to a minimum. This particularly applies (pursuant to Directive 
86/609/EEC) to animal experiments involving species which are closest to human beings. 
Altering the genetic heritage of animals and cloning of animals may be considered only 
if the aims are ethically justified and the conditions are such that the animals’ welfare is 
guaranteed and the principles of biodiversity are respected. 

Research relating to cancer treatment of the gonads can be financed. 

16



1.1.1 Genomics and biotechnology for health17 
The sequencing of the human genome and many other genomes heralds a new age in human 
biology, offering unprecedented opportunities to improve human health and to stimulate 
industrial and economic activity. In making its contribution to realising these benefits, this 
theme will focus on integrating post-genomic research into the more established biomedical 
and biotechnological approaches, and will facilitate the integration of research capacities 
(both public and private) across Europe to increase coherence and achieve critical mass. 
Integrated multidisciplinary research, which enables a strong interaction between technology 
and biology, is vital in this theme for translating genome data into practical applications. In 
addition, an essential element will be to involve key stakeholders, in particular for example, 
as appropriate industry, healthcare providers and practitioners physicians, policy makers, 
regulatory authorities, and patient associations, and experts on ethical matters, etc in 
implementing the theme. Gender equity in the research will also be ensured18. 

This thematic priority area will stimulate and sustain multidisciplinary basic research to 
exploit the full potential of genome information to underpin applications to human health. 

The emphasis will be put on research aimed at bringing basic knowledge through to 
application, to enable real and consistent progress in medicine and improve the quality 
of life. This research may also have implications for research on areas such as 
agriculture and environment, which are addressed under other thematic priorities. 

It will be an integral component of the European Community effort to enhance the European 
biotechnology industry in line with the conclusions of the Stockholm Council. It will 
endeavour to create strong links with all activities that improve the framework conditions for 
innovation in the health sector of the biotechnology industry, especially in SMEs, including 
stimulating entrepreneurship and opportunities for investment through venture capital and the 
involvement of the European Investment Bank. Attention will also be paid to the 
identification of regulatory bottlenecks in the development of new applications for genomics, 
to the anticipation at the earliest possible stage of the ethical implications and to the broader 
implications of developments in genomics research for society and citizens. 

This thematic priority area will also foster the implementation and development of the health 
strategy of the European Community. 

Throughout the thematic priority, international collaboration will be encouraged. Where 
appropriate, due account will be given to the European Community’s commitment to poverty 

17 

In this and other areas of activity within the framework programme, human cloning for reproductive 
purposes will not be supported; no research activities modifying or aiming to modify the genetic 
heritage of human beings will be carried out; nor will any research activity involving the creation of a 
human embryo for research or therapeutic purposes be carried out. As far as possible, animal 
experiments and testing should be replaced by in vitro or alternative methods. Animal suffering must be 
avoided or kept to a minimum and, in this regard, special attention must be paid to animal 
experimentation involving species that are the closest to human beings (in accordance with Directive 
86/609/CEE). The modification of the genetic heritage of animals and animal cloning will be envisaged 
only for objectives that are justified on ethical grounds and when carried out under conditions 
respecting animal welfare and the principles of genetic diversity. 

18 

Causes, clinical manifestation, consequences and treatment of disease and disorders often differ 
between women and men. Therefore, all activities funded within this thematic priority must take the 
possibility of gender differences into account in their research protocols, methodologies and analysis of 
results. 

17



reduction in developing countries and the importance that improved health will bring to the 
process – in line with Article 177 of the Treaty and with the European Community’s 
accelerated actions to combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. 

Research priorities 

i) Advanced genomics and its applications for health 

i)Fundamental knowledge and basic tools for functional genomics in all organisms 

The strategic objective of this line is to foster the basic understanding of genomic information, 
by developing the knowledge base, tools and resources needed to decipher the function of 
genes and gene products relevant to human health (including animal, plant and microbial 
genomes) and to explore their interactions with each other and with their environment. 
Research actions will encompass the following: 

– Gene expression and proteomics: The objectives are to enable researchers to better 
decipher the functions of genes and gene products as well as to define the complex 
regulatory networks (biocomplexity) that control fundamental biological processes. 
Research will focus on: developing high throughput tools and approaches for 
monitoring gene expression and protein profiles and for determining protein function 
and protein interactions. 
– Structural genomics: The objectives are to enable researchers to determine, more 
effectively and at a higher rate than is currently feasible, the 3-D structure of proteins 
and other macromolecules, which is important for elucidating protein function and 
essential for drug design. 
Research will focus on: developing high throughput approaches for determining 
high-resolution 3-D structures of macromolecules. 
– Comparative genomics and population genetics: The objectives are to enable 
researchers to use well-characterised model organisms for predicting and testing 
gene function and to take full advantage of specific population cohorts available in 
Europe to determine the relationship between gene function and health or disease. 
Research will focus on: developing model organisms and transgenic 
developing genetic epidemiology tools and standardised genotyping protocols. 
tools; 
– Bioinformatics: The objectives are to enable researchers to access efficient tools for 
managing and interpreting the ever–increasing quantities of genome data and for 
making it available to the research community in an accessible and usable form. 
Research will focus on: developing bioinformatic tools and resources for data 
storage, mining and processing; developing computational biology approaches for in 
silico prediction of gene function and for the simulation of complex regulatory 
networks. 

– Multidisciplinary functional genomics approaches to basic biological processes: 
The objectives are to enable researchers to study fundamental biological 
processes by integrating the above innovative approaches. 

18



Research will focus on: elucidation of the mechanisms underlying fundamental 
cellular processes, to identify the genes involved and to decipher their biological 
functions in living organisms. 

ii)Applications of knowledge and technologies in the field of genomics and biotechnology for 
health 

The strategic objective of this line is to foster the competitiveness of Europe’s biotechnology 
industry by exploiting the wealth of biological data produced by genomics and advances in 
biotechnology. Research actions will encompass the following: 

– Technological platforms for the developments in the fields of new diagnostic, 
prevention and therapeutic tools: The objectives are to foster academic and 
industrial collaboration through technological platforms where multidisciplinary 
approaches using cutting edge technologies arising from genomic research (such as 
pharmacogenomics) may contribute to health care progress and cost reduction 
through more precise diagnosis, individualised treatment and more efficient 
development pathways for new drugs and therapies, and other novel products of the 
new technologies. 
Research will focus on: rational and accelerated development of new, safer, more 
effective drugs including pharmacogenomics approaches; development of new 
diagnostics; development of new in vitro tests to replace animal experimentation; 
development and testing of new preventive and therapeutic tools, such as somatic 
gene and cell therapies (including in particular stem cell therapies) and 
immunotherapies; innovative research in post-genomics, which has high potential 
for application. 

– Support for innovative research in genomics start-up companies: The objectives are 
to facilitate the creation of research-based start-ups in Europe, to help sustain their 
early growth and to foster their further development in a multinational environment. 
Research will focus on: innovative aspects of post-genomics, which have high 
potential for application to health related issues and which are also expected to lead 
to entrepreneurial initiatives in start-up companies. 

With a view to ensuring socially responsible choices, public acceptance and an efficient 
development pathway for these new technologies, an active and early involvement in the 
above activities of regulators, experts on ethics, patients and society at large will be 
necessary. 

ii) Combating major diseases 

iii)Application-oriented genomic approaches to medical knowledge and technologies in 
medicine and public health 

The strategic objective of this line is to develop improved strategies for the prevention and 
management of human disease and for living and ageing healthily. It will concentrate 
exclusively on integrating the genomic approach through all relevant organisms into more 
established medical approaches for investigating disease and health determinants. The 
emphasis will be put on translational research aimed at bringing basic knowledge 
through to clinical application. Research actions will focus on the following: 

19



– Combating cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and rare diseases:The 
objectives are to improve the prevention and management of the two major 
important causes of ill health and mortality and ill health in Europe and to pool 
Europe’s research resources for tackling rare diseases. 
Research will focus on: integrating clinical expertise and resources with relevant 
model systems and advanced tools in functional genomics to generate breakthroughs 
in the prevention and management of these diseases. 

– Combating resistance to antibiotics and other drugs: The objectives are to confront 
the major threat to public health caused by drug resistant pathogens. 
Research will focus on: exploitation of the knowledge of microbial genomes and on 
host-pathogen interactions for the development of vaccines and alternative 
therapeutic strategies to circumvent the problem of antimicrobial and other drug 
resistance; development of strategies for optimal usage of antimicrobials; support to 
the European Community network for epidemiological surveillance and control of 
communicable diseases. 

– Studying the brain and combating diseases of the nervous system: The objectives 
are to use genome information to understand better the functioning and 
dysfunctioning of the brain, in order to gain new insight into mental processes, to 
combat neurological disorders and diseases, and to improve brain repair. 
Research will focus on: understanding the molecular and cellular bases of brain 
function, damage, plasticity and repair, learning, memory and cognition; developing 
strategies for prevention and management of neurological and mental disorders and 
diseases. 

– Studying human development and the ageing process: The objective is to better 
understand human development, with special emphasis on the ageing process, in 
order to develop the evidence base for improving public health strategies to promote 
healthy living and healthy ageing. 
Research will focus on: understanding human development from conception to 
adolescence; exploring the molecular and cellular determinants of healthy ageing 
including their interactions with environmental, behavioural and gender factors. 

Combating cancer 

The objective is to develop improved patient-oriented strategies, from prevention to 
diagnosis and treatment, for combating cancer. The research will therefore concentrate 
on translating the new knowledge being created by genomics and other fields of basic 
research into applications that improve clinical practice and public health. 

The patient-oriented approach will include three interlinked components. Research will 
focus on : 

– Establishing facilities for the exploitation of research on cancer in Europe; 
encouraging the development of evidence-based guidelines for good clinical 
practice and improved public health strategies by accelerating the translation of 
existing research results into applications. 
20



– Supporting clinical research, particularly clinical trials, aimed at validating new 
and improved interventions. 
– Supporting translational research aimed at bringing basic knowledge through to 
applications in clinical practice and public health. 
iv)Confronting the major communicable diseases linked to poverty 

The strategic objective of this line is to confront the global emergency caused by the three 
major communicable diseases -HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis – through the 
development of effective disease interventions, particularly for use in developing countries. It 
is envisaged that developing countries will be significant partners in the implementation of 
this line and, as appropriate, participate directly in specific activities within it,in 
particular through the European Cclinical Ttrials Platform. programme 

Research will focus on: developing promising candidate interventions (vaccines, therapies 
and HIV microbicides) against the target diseases by sponsoring research over the full 
spectrum from basic molecular research, taking advantage of microbial genomics, through to 
pre-clinical testing and proof-of-principle; establishing a European Cclinical Ttrials 
platform programme to unite and support Europe’s clinical trial activities specifically 
targeted at interventions for use in developing countries; establishing an AIDS Therapy Trials 
Network in Europe to improve the coherence and complementarity of clinical trials of AIDS 
therapies for European use. 

The research activities carried out within this thematic priority area will include 
exploratory research at the leading edge of knowledge on subjects closely related to one 
or more topics within it. Two complementary approaches will be utilised: one receptive 
and open – the other proactive. 

1.1.2 Information Society technologies 
Information society technologies (IST) are transforming the economy and society. Not only 
are they creating new ways of working and new types of business, but provide solutions to 
major societal challenges such as healthcare, environment, safety, mobility and employment, 
and have far reaching implications on our everyday life. The IST sector is now one the most 
important of the economy, with an annual turnover of EUR 2000 billion, providing 
employment for more than 12 million people in Europe. 

The IST thematic priority will contribute directly to realising European policies for the 
knowledge society as agreed at the Lisbon Council of 2000, the Stockholm Council of 2001, 
and reflected in the e-Europe Action Plan. It will ensure European leadership in the generic 
and applied technologies at the heart of the knowledge economy. It aims to increase 
innovation and competitiveness in European businesses and industry and to contribute to 
greater benefits for all European citizens. 

Successes, like those achieved in Europe in mobile communications or consumer electronics, 
will not be repeated unless a real effort is made to achieve critical mass in key domains of IST 
research. The actions will therefore mobilise the community of researchers around medium to 
long term objectives, facilitating the integration of public and private effort on a European 
scale, to build essential competencies and strengthen innovation. They will involve high-risk 

21



and long term RTD such as the development of the next generation of mobile and wireless 
systems beyond 3G. and will include underpinning research to investigate and experiment 
with future and emerging technologies within the specific context of the priority research 
areas indicated 

Although substantial advances have been achieved, we are still far from taking full advantage 
of the potential of knowledge-based services in real life. Products and services are still hard to 
use and out of reach for many people, and the “digital divide” is widening within Europe and 
across the world. Research will focus on the future generation of technologies in which 
computers and networks will be integrated into the everyday environment, rendering 
accessible a multitude of services and applications through easy-to-use human interfaces. 
This vision of "ambient intelligence" places the user, the individual, at the centre of future 
developments for an inclusive knowledge-based society for all. 

The IST priority in support of the eEurope action plan, will help build an information and 
knowledge based society across Europe, encouraging the participation of least developed 
regions. It will also include activities linking the EU effort to the international context. The 
aim is to achieve thematic area global consensus when appropriate e.g. through the Intelligent 
Manufacturing Systems (IMS) initiative or the dialogue on dependability issues, to integrate 
further the research of the Newly Associated States within the EU effort and to facilitate cooperation with developing countries. 

In addition to the above, the priority thematic area will support research to investigate 
and experiment with future visions and emerging technologies at the frontier of 
knowledge in the IST field. 

Within the context of the priorities identified below, the priority thematic area will also 
include activities relating to the further development of Géant and GRIDs. 

Research priorities 

i) Applied IST research addressing major societal and economic challenges 

The objective is to extend the scope and efficiency of IST-based solutions addressing major 
societal and economic challenges, and to make them accessible in the most trusted and natural 
way, anywhere and anytime to citizens, businesses and organisations. 

– Research on Technologies for trust and confidence security: The objective is to 
develop technologies for key security challenges posed by the “all-digital” world and 
by the need to secure the rights of individuals and communities. 
Research will focus on basic security mechanisms and their interoperability, 
dynamic security processes, advanced cryptography, privacy enhancing 
technologies, technologies to handle digital assets and technologies for 
dependability to support business and organisational functions in dynamic and 
mobile systems. 

– Research addressing societal challenges: The focus is on “ambient intelligence” for 
a broader inclusion of citizens in the Information Society, for more effective health, 
security, mobility and environment management and support systems, and for the 
preservation of cultural heritage, integration of multiple functionalities across these 
different domains will be also supported. 
22



Research activities on “e-inclusion” will concentrate on systems enabling access for 
all, on barrier-free technologies for full participation in the information society and 
on assistive systems that will restore functions or compensate for disabilities thereby 
enabling a higher quality of life for citizens with special needs and their carers. In 
the area of health, the work will focus on intelligent systems aimed at supporting 
health professionals, at providing patients with personalised healthcare and 
information, and at stimulating health promotion and disease prevention in the 
general population. Research will also address intelligent systems to enhance the 
protection of people and property and for securing and safeguarding civil 
infrastructures. 

In the area of mobility, research will focus on vehicle infrastructure and portable 
systems to provide integrated safety, comfort and efficiency and allow for the 
provision of advanced logistics infomobility and location based services. Research in 
the area of environment will focus on knowledge-based systems for natural resource 
management and for risk prevention and crisis management including humanitarian 
mine clearance. In the area of leisure, research will focus on intelligent and mobile 
systems and application for entertainment and tourism. For cultural heritage,the 
effort will focus on intelligent systems for dynamic access to and preservation of 
tangible and intangible cultural and scientific resources. 

– Research addressing work and business challenges: The objective is to provide 
businesses, individuals, public administrations, and other organisations with the 
means to fully contribute to, and benefit from, the development of a trusted 
knowledge-based economy, whilst at the same time improving the quality of work 
and working life and support life-long continuous learning to improve work skills. 
Research will also aim at a better understanding of the socio-economic drivers and 
impact of IST development. 
Research in e-business and e-government will focus on providing European 
organisations, private and public, and especially SMEs, with interoperable systems 
and services to enhance innovation capacities, value creation and competitive 
performance in the knowledge economy and on supporting new business ecosystems. 
Research in organisational knowledge management will aim at supporting 
organisational innovation and responsiveness through elicitation, sharing, trading, 
and delivery of knowledge. Work on electronic and mobile commerce will target 
interoperable, multimodal applications and services across heterogeneous networks. 
It will include anytime-anywhere trading, collaboration, workflow, and electronic 
services covering the whole value creation cycle of extended products and services. 

Research into eWork systems will focus on new workplace designs incorporating 
innovative technologies to facilitate creativity and collaboration, on increasing 
resource-use efficiency and on extending work opportunities to all in local 
communities. Work on eLearning will focus on personalised access to, and delivery 
of, learning as well as on advanced learning environments at school, university, and 
in the workplace and in lifelong learning in general, taking that take advantage of 
the development of ambient intelligence. 

– Complex problem solving in science, engineering, businesses and for society:The 
objective is to develop technologies for harnessing computing and storage resources 
which are distributed in geographically dispersed locations, and for making them 
23



accessible, in a seamless way, for complex problem solving in science, industry, 
business and society. Application fields include environment, energy, health, 
transport, industrial engineering, finance and new media. 

Research will focus on new computational models, including computing and 
information GRIDs, peer-to-peer technologies and the associated middleware to 
make use of large scale highly distributed computing and storage resources and to 
develop scalable, dependable and secure platforms. It will include novel 
collaborative tools and programming methods supporting interoperability of 
applications and new generations of simulation, visualisation and datamining tools. 

ii) Communication, and computing infrastructures and software technologies 

The objectives are to consolidate and further develop European strengths in areas such as 
mobile communications, consumer electronics and embedded software and systems,and to 
improve the performance, cost-efficiency, functionality and adaptive capabilities of 
communications and computing technologies. Work will also lead to the next generation 
Internet. 

– Communication and network technologies: The objective is to develop the new 
generations of mobile and wireless systems and networks that allow optimal service 
connection anywhere as well as all-optical networks to increase network 
transparency and capacity, solutions to improve network interoperation and 
adaptability, and technologies for personalised access to networked audio-visual 
systems. 
Work on terrestrial and satellite19 based, mobile and wireless systems and networks 
beyond 3G will focus on the next generation of technologies, ensuring co-operation 
and seamless inter-working at service and control planes of multiple wireless 
technologies over a common IP (Internet Protocol) platform as well as novel 
spectral efficient protocols, tools and technologies, to build wireless re-configurable 
IP enabled devices, systems and networks. 

Research in all optical networks will focus on the management of optical wavelength 
channels enabling flexibility and speed in service deployment and provisioning and 
solutions for fibre to the LAN. Research on interoperable network solutions, 
including end-to-end network management will support generic services provision 
and interworking, and interoperation between heterogeneous networks and 
platforms. It will include programmable networks to provide adaptive and real-time 
allocation of network resources and enhanced service management capabilities by 
customers. 

Research will also address the enabling technologies for personalised access to 
networked audio-visual systems and applications as well as cross-media service 
platforms and networks, trusted digital TV architectures and appliances able to 
process, encode, store, sense and display hybrid 3D multimedia signals and objects. 

The activity on satellite communications is done in coordination with the activities in priority 4 
“aeronautics and space”. 

24



– Software technologies, services embedded systems and distributed systems The 
objective is to develop new software technologies, multifunctional service creation 
environments as well as tools for the control of complex distributed systems for the 
realisation of an ambient intelligence landscape and for coping with the expected 
growth and spread of applications and services. 
Research will focus on new technologies for software and systems and services, that 
address composability, scalability, reliability and robustness as well as autonomous 
self-adaptation. It will address include middleware for the management, control and 
use of fully distributed resources. Work on multifunctional service creation 
environments and new component frameworks will aim at the development of service 
functionality, including meta-information, semantics and taxonomy of the building 
blocks. 

New strategies, algorithms, and tools for systematic and accurate design, 
prototyping and control of complex distributed systems will be addressed. Work will 
include networked embedded systems, distributed sensing, computing, storage 
resources and related intercommunication. Dynamic resources allocation will be a 
key feature as well as cognitive techniques for generic object and events 
recognition. e.g. with embedded controllers and ubiquitous computing resources. 
Work will include cognitive techniques for generic object and event recognition. 

iii) Components and microsystems 

– Micro, Nano and Opto-electronics The objective is to reduce the cost, increase the 
performance and improve reconfigurability, scalability, adaptability and selfadjusting capabilities of micro-, nano-and opto-electronic components and systemson-a-chip. 
Research will focus on pushing the limits of CMOS process and equipment 
technologies and enhancing device functionality, performance and integration of 
functions. It will address alternative process technologies, device types, materials 
and architectures to meet demands of communication and computing. Particular 
emphasis will be put on RF, mixed-signal and low power design. Work on optical, 
opto-electronic, and photonic functional components, will address devices and 
systems for information processing, communication, switching, storage, sensing and 
imaging. Research on electron based nano-devices, as well as on molecular 
electronics devices and technologies, will target those that promise broad 
functionality and have integration-and mass fabrication potential. 

– Micro and Nano Technologies, Microsystems, Displays: The objective is to improve 
the cost-efficiency, performance and functionality of subsystems and microsystems 
and to increase the level of integration and miniaturisation allowing for improved 
interfacing with their surrounding and with networked services and systems. 
Research will focus on new applications and functions that take advantage of multidisciplinary interactions (electronics, mechanics, chemistry, biology, etc.) combined 
with the use of micro and nano-structures and new materials. The aim is to develop 
innovative, cost-effective and reliable microsystems and reconfigurable, 
miniaturised subsystem modules. Work will also include low cost, information-rich 
and higher resolution displays as well as advanced sensors including low cost vision 

25



and bio-metric sensors, and haptic devices. Work on nano-devices and nanosystems will address the exploitation of basic phenomena, processes and structures 
that promise novel or improved sensing or actuating functionality as well as their 
integration and fabrication. 

iv) Knowledge and interface technologies 

The objective is to improve usability of IST applications and services and access to the 
knowledge they embody in order to encourage their wider adoption and faster deployment. 

– Knowledge technologies and digital content: The objective is to provide automated 
solutions for creating and organising virtual knowledge spaces (e.g. collective 
memories) so as to stimulate radically new content and media services and 
applications. 
Work will focus on technologies to support the process of acquiring and modelling, 
navigating and retrieving, representing and visualising, interpreting and sharing 
knowledge. These functions will be integrated in new semantic-based and contextaware systems including cognitive and agent-based tools. Work will address 
extensible knowledge resources and ontologies so as to facilitate service 
interoperabilitiy and enable next-generation Semantic-web applications. Research 
will also address technologies to support the design, creation, management and 
publishing of multimedia content, across fixed and mobile networks and devices, 
with the ability to self-adapt to user expectations. The aim is to stimulate the creation 
of rich interactive content for personalised broadcasting and advanced trusted media 
and entertainment applications. 

– Intelligent interfaces and surfaces : The objective is to provide more effective ways 
of accessing ubiquitous information and easier and natural interaction modes with 
intelligence that surrounds us. 
Research will focus on interfaces and interactive surfaces that are natural, adaptive 
and multi-sensorial, for an ambient landscape that is aware of our presence, 
personality and needs, and which is capable of responding intelligently to speech, or 
gesture or other senses. The aim is to hide the complexity of technology by 
supporting a seamless human interaction between humans, between humans and with 
devices, virtual and physical objects and the knowledge embedded in everyday 
environments. This includes research on virtual and augmented reality 

Work will also address technologies for multilingual and multicultural access and 
communication that support timely and cost effective provisions of interactive 
information-rich services meeting the personal, professional and business 
requirements of all members of linguistically and culturally diverse communities. 

IST future and emerging technologies: in this area, the objective is to help new ISTrelated science and technology fields and communities to emerge, some of which will 
become strategic for economic and social development in the future and will feed into 
the mainstream IST activities in the future. To ensure openness to unforeseeable ideas, 
critical mass of research where strategic focus is needed, and seamless coverage of the 
IST frontier, two complementary approaches will be utilised: one receptive and open 
the other proactive. 

26



1.1.3 Nanotechnologies and nanosciences, knowledge-based multifunctional intelligent 
materials and new production processes and devices 
The twofold transition toward a knowledge-based society and of sustainable development 
demands new paradigms of production and new concepts of product-services. European 
production industry as a whole needs to move from resource-based towards knowledge-based, 
more environment-friendly approaches, from quantity to quality, from mass produced 
single-use products to manufactured-on-demand multi-use, upgradable product-services; from 
“material and tangible” to “intangible” value-added products, processes and services. 

These changes are associated with radical shifts in industrial structures, involving a stronger 
presence of innovative enterprises, with capabilities in networks and mastering new hybrid 
technologies combining nanotechnologies, material sciences, engineering, information 
technologies, bio and environmental sciences. Such an evolution implies a strong 
collaboration across traditional scientific frontiers. Leading edge industrial developments 
involve also a strong synergy between technology and organisation, the performance of both 
being highly dependent on new skills. 

Successful technological solutions have to be sought more and more upstream in the design 
and production processes; new materials and nanotechnologies have a crucial role to play in 
this respect, as drivers of innovation. This requires changes of emphasis in Community 
research activities from short to longer term and in innovation which must move from 
incremental to breakthrough strategies. Community research will benefit greatly from an 
international dimension. 

Research priorities 

i) Nanotechnologies and Nanosciences 

Nanotechnologies represent a new approach to materials science and engineering. Europe 
enjoys a strong position in the nanosciences, that needs to be translated into a real competitive 
advantage for European industry. The objective is twofold: to promote the creation of an 
RTD-intensive European nanotechnology related industry, and to promote the uptake of 
nanotechnologies in existing industrial sectors. Research may be long-term and high risk, but 
will be oriented towards industrial application. An active policy of encouraging industrial 
companies and SMEs, including start-ups, will be pursued, amongst others through the 
promotion of strong industry/research interactions in consortia undertaking projects with 
substantial critical mass. 

– Long-term interdisciplinary research into understanding phenomena, mastering 
harnessing processes and developing research tools: The objectives are to expand 
the generic underlying knowledge base of application oriented nano-science and 
nanotechnology, and to develop leading edge research tools and techniques. 
Research will focus on: molecular and mesoscopic scale phenomena; selfassembling materials and structures; molecular and bio-molecular mechanisms and 
engines; multi-disciplinary and new approaches to integrate developments in 
inorganic, organic and biological materials and processes. 

27



– Nanobiotechnologies: The objective is to support research into the integration of 
biological and non-biological entities, opening new horizons in many applications, 
such as for processing and for medical and environmental analysis systems. 
Research will focus on: lab-on-chip, interfaces to biological entities, surface 
modified nano-particles, advanced drug delivery and other areas of integrating 
nano-systems or nanoelectronics with biological entities; processing, manipulation 
and detection of biological molecules or complexes, electronic detection of 
biological entities, micro-fluidics, promotion and control of growth of cells on 
substrates. 

– Nanometre-scale engineering techniques to create materials and components:The 
objective is to develop novel functional and structural materials of superior 
performance, by controlling their nano-structure. This will include technologies for 
their production and processing. 
Research will focus on : nano-structured alloys and composites, advanced functional 
polymeric materials, and nano-structured functional materials. 

– Development of handling and control devices and instruments: The objective is to 
develop a new generation of instrumentation for analysis and manufacture at the 
nano-scale. A guiding target will be a feature size or resolution of the order of 10nm. 
Research will focus on : a variety of advanced techniques for nano-scale 
manufacture (lithography or microscopy based techniques); breakthrough 
technologies, methodologies or instruments exploiting the self-assembling properties 
of matter and developing nano-scale machines. 

– Applications in areas such as health, chemistry, energy, optics and the 
environment: The objective is to foster the potential of nanotechnologies in 
breakthrough applications through the integration of research developments in 
materials and technological devices in an industrial context. 
Research will focus on: computational modelling, advanced production 
technologies; development of innovative materials with improved characteristics. 

ii) Knowledge-based Multifunctional Intelligent Materials 

New, high knowledge-content materials, providing new functionalities and improved 
performance, will be critical drivers of innovation in technologies, devices and systems, 
benefiting sustainable development and competitiveness in sectors such as transport, energy, 
medicine, electronics, and construction. To assure Europe's strong positions in emerging 
technology markets, which are expected to grow by one or two orders of magnitude within the 
next decade, the various actors need to be mobilised through leading edge RTD partnerships, 
including high risk research and through integration between research on materials and 
industrial applications. 

– Development of fundamental knowledge: The objective is to understand complex 
physico-chemical and biological phenomena relevant to the mastering and processing 
of intelligent materials with the help of experimental, theoretical and modelling tools. 
This will provide the basis for synthesising larger complex or self-assembling 
structures with defined physical, chemical or biological characteristics. 
28



Research will focus on: long-term, trans-disciplinary and high industrial risk 
activities to design and develop new structures with defined characteristics; 
development of supra-molecular and macromolecular engineering, focusing on the 
synthesis, exploitation and potential use of novel highly complex molecules and their 
compounds. 

– Technologies associated with the production, transformation and processing of 
knowledge-based multifunctional of new materials, and biomaterials: The objective 
is the sustainable production of new “smart” materials with tailor-made 
functionalities and for building up macro-structures. These novel materials, serving 
multisectorial applications should incorporate in-built characteristics to be exploited 
under predetermined circumstances as well as enhanced bulk properties or barrier 
and surface characteristics for higher performance. 
Research will focus on: new materials; engineered and self-repairing materials; 
crosscutting technologies including surface science and engineering. 

– Engineering support for materials development: The objective is to bridge the gap 
from “knowledge production” to “knowledge use”, thus overcoming the EU 
industry’s weaknesses in the integration of materials and manufacturing. This will be 
achieved by the development of new tools enabling the production of new materials 
in a context of sustainable competitiveness. 
Research will focus on: inherent aspects of optimising materials design, processing 
and tools; mechanical testing, validation and up-scaling; incorporation of life-cycle 
approaches, obsolescence, bio-compatibility and eco-efficiency. 

iii) New Production Processes and Devices 

New production concepts which are more flexible, integrated, safe and clean will depend on 
breakthrough organisational and technological developments, supporting new products, 
processes and services, and at the same time decreasing (internal and external) costs. The 
objective is to provide the industrial systems of the future with the necessary tools for 
efficient life-cycle design, production, use and recovery as well as appropriate organisational 
models and improved knowledge management. 

– Development of new processes and flexible and intelligent manufacturing systems. 
The objective is to encourage industry’s transition towards more knowledge-based 
production and systems organisation and to considering production from a more 
holistic perspective, encompassing not only hardware and software, but also people 
and the way in which they learn and share knowledge. 
Research will focus on: innovative, reliable, smart and cost-effective manufacturing 
processes, and systems, and their incorporation into the factory of the future: 
integrating hybrid technologies based on new materials and their processing, microsystems and automation, high-precision production equipment, as well as integration 
of ICT, sensing and control technologies, and innovative robotics. 

– Systems research and hazard control. The objective is tocontributetoanimproved 
sustainability of industrial systems and a substantial and measurable reduction in 
environmental and health impact, through new industrial approaches, as well as 
29



enhancement of resource efficiency and reduction in consumption of primary 
resources. resource consumption.. 

Research will focus on: development of new devices and systems for clean, and safe 
and less carbon-intensive production; non-polluting, sustainable waste 
management and hazard reduction in production and manufacturing, including 
bio-processes; enhancing company responsibility on products, resource consumption 
and industrial waste management; studying “production-use-consumption” 
interactions, as well as socio-economic implications. 

– Optimising the life-cycle of industrial systems, products and services. Products and 
production should become increasingly life-cycle and service oriented, in addition to 
the requirements of intelligence, cost-effectiveness, safety and cleanliness. The key 
challenge is therefore new industrial concepts based on life-cycle approaches, which 
must allow new products, organisational innovation and the efficient management of 
information and its transformation into useable knowledge within the value chain. 
Research will focus on: innovative product-services systems that optimise the 
“design-production-service-end-of-life” value chain through of hybrid technologies 
and new organisational structures. 

The research activities carried out within this thematic priority area will include 
exploratory research at the leading edge of knowledge on subjects closely related to one 
or more topics within it. Two complementary approaches will be utilised: one receptive 
and open – the other proactive. 

1.1.4 Aeronautics and space 
Over the last decades, Europe’s outstanding technological and industrial capabilities in 
aeronautics and the exploitation of space have made many and various contributions to the 
standard of living of its citizens and the development and growth of its economies, as well as 
to those outside Europe. The economic benefits they bring can be seen in highly skilled 
employment and the balance of trade surplus, and they can have a strong leverage effect in 
upgrading the competitiveness of other related economic sectors. 

Although aeronautics and space are distinct domains, they share common features, being 
extremely R&D intensive, with long development lead-times and very large investment 
requirements. Fierce competition, strategic significance, and increasingly severe 
environmental constraints combine to make it necessary to strive continually towards higher 
levels of technological excellence by consolidating and concentrating RTD efforts in Europe, 
with the ultimate aim of better serving society. 

Aeronautics research will be planned against a Strategic Research Agenda (SRA) agreed by 
all stakeholders at European level in the context of the new Advisory Council for Aeronautics 
Research in Europe, which will also be the planning base for national programmes. The result 
will be a greater level of complementarity and co-operation between the national and 
Community efforts in the field. The European Strategy for Space will serve as a reference in 
planning space research, with the objective of gathering key players on projects of common 
interest and close liaison will be ensured with RTD activities carried out by other actors, such 

30



as space agencies, Eurocontrol and industry. Furthermore, the application of relevant Treaty 
articles will be explored to support, as appropriate, these initiatives. 

Research priorities 

i) Aeronautics 

In their report "Vision 2020 ", leaders of the sector in Europe have highlighted the need to 
optimise the Community and national research efforts around a common vision and a strategic 
research agenda. Consistent with this, research will concentrate on the following 4 main 
strands. The scope of the research action will be medium and large sized commercial 
transport aircraft including their systems and components, as well as the on-board and 
ground-based elements of air-traffic management systems. 

– Strengthening competitiveness: The objective is to enable the 3 sectors of the 
manufacturing industry: airframe, engines and equipment, to increase their 
competitiveness, by reducing, in the short and long term, respectively, aircraft 
development costs by 20% and 50%, and aircraft direct operating cost by 20% and 
50%, and improving passenger comfort. 
Research will focus on: integrated design systems and processes for the realisation 
of the extended multi-site enterprise concept, as well as for more intelligent 
production technologies; new aircraft configurations, advanced aerodynamics, 
materials and structures, engine technologies; mechanical, electrical and hydraulic 
systems; improved cabin-environmental conditions and utilisation of multimedia 
services to improve passenger comfort. 

– Improving environmental impact with regard to engine emissions and noise. 
Concerning emissions, the objectives are to meet Kyoto goals and to compensate for 
the increase in future air traffic, by reducing fuel consumption and emissions of 
CO2 by 50% in the long term and of NOx by 20% and 80%, in the short and long 
term, respectively. Concerning noise, to limit the noise nuisance outside the airport 
boundary, the target is to reduce noise levels by 4-5 dB in the short term and 10 dB 
in the long term. 
Concerning emissions, research Work will focus on: low-emission combustion and 
propulsion concepts, engine technologies and related control systems, low-drag 
aerodynamic concepts, low-weight airframe structures and high temperature 
materials, as well as improved flight operational procedures. Research on noise will 
focus on: engine and power-plant technologies, aeroacoustics for airframe noise 
reduction, advanced noise-control systems as well as novel flight operational 
procedures in the vicinity of airports. 

– Improving aircraft safety. The objective is to obtain a two-fold reduction in accident 
rates in the short-term, and a five-fold reduction in the long term, in order to 
compensate for the growth in air transport movements. 
Concerning preventive safety, research will focus on: investigation of systemic safety 
models, improved fault-tolerant systems and human-centred cockpit design enabling 
a controllable situation awareness for the crew. Research on accident mitigation will 
focus on improved materials and structures as well as advanced safety systems. 

31



– Increasing operational capacity and safety of the air transport system.The 
objective is to optimise airspace and airport utilisation, and consequently reduce 
flight delays, through a seamlessly integrated European air traffic management 
system, which would facilitate the achievement of the “Single European-Sky” 
initiative. 
Research will focus on on-board and ground automation aids, communication, 
navigation and surveillance systems as well as flight operation procedures that will 
enable the introduction of new concepts including the free-flight concept in the future 
European ATM system. 

ii) Space 

The aim is to contribute to the implementation of the European Strategy for Space, notably by 
targeting and focusing efforts with ESA and Member States on a small number of joint 
actions of common interest. Emphasis will be put on activities complementing those of space 
agencies (integration of terrestrial and space systems/services and demonstration of end-toend services). This will include the following areas of activity: 

– Galileo: the European Satellite Navigation system GALILEO, developed by the Joint 
Undertaking in close co-operation with the European Space Agency, will be fully 
operational by 2008. The use of the services provided by this infrastructure will span 
over wide ranges of activities of European society. The availability of precise 
navigation and timing services will have profound impacts in many domains. 
It is important to build the necessary expertise and knowledge in Europe in order to 
exploitthis emerging technology in the mostefficientway. 

Research will focus on: development of multisectorial concepts, systems and tools, 
user equipment including receivers, which will rely on precise navigation and 
timing service provision; spreading of high level, coherent and seamless quality 
services in all environments (cities, indoors and outdoors, land, sea, air, etc.), in 
synergy with other service provision (telecommunication, surveillance, observation, 
etc.). 

– GMES: the objective is to stimulate the development evolution of markets for 
satellite-based information services, by development of technologies to bridge the 
gap between supply and demand, and to build up a European capability in the 
field of monitoring for environment and security. 
Research will focus on: sensors, data, and information models, developed in Europe 
or elsewhere, as well as developing prototypes of operational services responding to 
specific types of demand (for example global environment, land-use, desertification, 
disaster management). Research, including on data acquisition, assembly and 
qualification of models combining spatial and terrestrial data in an integrated 
operational information system, would use existing satellite data, for example 
provided by Envisat, future EarthWatch projects and other systems. 

32



– Satellite telecommunications: Satellite communications should be integrated with 
the wider area of telecommunications systems, notably terrestrial systems20. 
The research activities carried out within this thematic priority area will include 
exploratory research at the leading edge of knowledge on subjects closely related to one 
or more topics within it. Two complementary approaches will be utilised: one receptive 
and open – the other proactive. 

1.1.5 Food Quality and Safety and health risks 
This priority area is aimed at assuring the health and well-being of European citizens through 
a better understanding of the influence of food intake and environmental factors on human 
health and to provide them with safer, high-quality and health-promoting foods, including 
seafoods, relying on fully controlled and integrated production systems originating in 
agriculture, aquaculture and fisheries. By re-addressing the classical approach ‘from farm to 
fork’, this thematic priority area aims at ensuring that consumer protection is the main driver 
for developing new and safer food and feed production chains, i.e. ‘from fork to farm’, 
relying in particular on biotechnology tools taking into account the latest results of 
genomics research. 

This end-user driven approach is reflected in the seven specific research objectives. Priority 
will be given to integrated research approaches crossing several specific objectives.Given 
that small enterprises constitute a major part of the food sector, the success of activities 
undertaken will rely on the adaptation of knowledge and processes to the specific 
characteristics of these enterprises. 

Research priorities 

– Epidemiology of food-related diseases genetic susceptibilities, and allergies. The 
objective is to examine the complex interactions between food intake and 
metabolism, immune system, genetic background and environmental factors to 
identify key risk factors and develop common European databases. 
Research will focus on : epidemiological studies of the effect of diet, food 
composition and lifestyle factors, on the health of consumers and specific 
population groups such as children, and the prevention or development of specific 
diseases, allergies and disorders; methodologies for measuring and analysing food 
composition and dietary intake, risk assessment, epidemiological and intervention 
models; influences of genetic variability using advances in functional genomics. 

– Impact of food and in particular products containing genetically modified organisms 
on health: The objective is to provide the scientific basis for improving health 
through diet, and the development of new health-promoting foods, considering for 
instance new products, products resulting from organic farming, functional 
foods, products containing genetically modified organisms, and those arising 
from recent biotechnology developments, on health by means of an improved 
Considering the tight links between communications satellites and terrestrial technologies, the related 
work is presented in the context of the relevant actions of the “Information society technologies” 
thematic priority area. 

33



understanding of food metabolism and by harnessing the opportunities now available 
from proteomics and biotechnology. 

Research will focus on: overall relationship between diet and health; health 
promoting and disease prevention properties of foods; effects of food components, 
pathogens, chemical contaminants and new agents of prion type on health body 
function; nutrient requirements and health promoting intervention strategies; 
determinants of consumer attitudes towards food products and production; 
methodologies for risk/benefit assessment of nutrients and of bioactive compounds; 
specificities of different population age groups, particularly older consumers the 
elderly and children. 

– “Traceability” processes all along the production chain in particular relating to 
genetically modified organisms including systems based on recent biotechnology 
developments. The objective is to strengthen the scientific and technological basis for 
ensuring complete traceability for instance of genetically modified organisms, 
including those based on recent biotechnology developments from raw material 
origin to purchased food products, and thereby increase consumer confidence in the 
food supply. 
Research will focus on: development, validation and harmonisation of technologies 
and methodologies to ensure complete traceability throughout the food chain ; scaleup, implementation and validation of methods in whole food chains; assurance of 
authenticity; validity of labelling; and new application of HACCP to the whole food 
chain criteria. 

– Methods of analysis, and detection and control: The objective is to contribute to the 
development, improvement, validation and harmonisation of reliable and costeffective sampling and measurement strategies for chemical contaminants and 
existing or emerging pathogenic micro-organisms (such as viruses, bacteria, 
yeasts, fungi, parasites, and new agents of the prion type including development 
of ante mortem diagnostic tests for BSE and scrapie) so as to for controlling the 
safety of the food and feed supply and ensureing accurate data for risk analysis. 
Research will focus on: methods and standards for analysing and detecting food-
borne pathogens and chemical contaminants, including pre-normative aspects; 
modelling and approaches to improve existing prevention and measurement control 
strategies; detection tests and geographical mapping of prions; material transfer 
and longevity of prions and environmental influences. 

– Safer and environmentally friendly production methods and healthier foodstuffs 
including those based on and on organic farming processes: The objective is to 
develop lower input farming systems (agriculture and aquaculture) based on 
systems such as integrated production, lower-input methods including organic 
agriculture and the use of plant and animal sciences and biotechnologies and 
improved transformation processes aimed at producing safer and health-promoting 
healthier nutritious, functional and varied foodstuffs, and animal feed, and 
improving the quality of food and feed through innovative technologies. 
Research will focus on: development of improved integrated production systems, 
lower-input farming, organic farming and GMO-based production as well as 

34



processing and distribution methods and innovative technologies for safer, nutritious 
and higher quality food and feed; individual and comparative assessment of safety, 
quality, environmental impact and competitiveness aspects of different production 
methods and foodstuffs; improvement of animal husbandry, waste-management and 
animal welfare from housing to slaughter; application of plant and animal sciences 
and biotechnologies, including the application of genomics, for the development of 
higher quality food raw materials and nutritious foods. 

– Impact of animal feed, on human health: The objective is to improve understanding 
of the role of animal feed, including products containing genetically modified 
organisms and the use of sub-products of different origins for that feed, in food 
safety, to reduce the use of undesirable raw materials and to develop alternative new 
animal feed sources. 
Research will focus on: epidemiological studies of animal-feed induced food-borne 
diseases; influence of raw materials, including waste and by-products of different 
origins, processing methods, additives and veterinary drugs used in animal feed on 
animal and human health; improved waste management, to ensure exclusion of 
specified high-risk and condemned materials from the feed chain; novel protein, fat 
and energy sources other than meat and bone meal for optimal animal growth, 
reproductive potential and food product quality. 

– Environmental health risks The objectives are to identify the environmental factors 
that are detrimental to health, understand the mechanisms involved and determine 
how to prevent or minimise these effects and risks. 
a) Risks linked to the food-chain (chemical, biological and physical) 

b) Combined exposures of authorised substances, including impact of local 
environmental disasters and pollution on the safety of foodstuffs, with 
emphasis being placed on cumulative risks, transmission routes to human 
beings, long-term effects and exposure to small doses, as well as the impact 
on particularly sensitive groups, and especially children 

Research will focus on: identification of causal agents including contaminants, and 
physiological mechanisms, of environmental, and food-linked health impacts 
environmental hazards; understanding of exposure pathways, estimation of 
cumulative, low dose and combined exposures; long-term effects; definition and 
protection of susceptible sub-groups; environmental causes and mechanisms 
responsible for the increase in allergies; impact of endocrine disrupters; chronic 
chemical pollution and combined environmental exposures, transmission of illnesses 
linked to water (parasites, viruses, bacteria, etc). 

The research activities carried out within this thematic priority area will include 
exploratory research at the leading edge of knowledge on subjects closely related to one 
or more topics within it. Two complementary approaches will be utilised: one receptive 
and open – the other proactive. 

35



1.1.6 Sustainable development, and global change and ecosystems 
The Treaty confirms Sustainable Development as a central objective of the European 
Community; this was emphasised by the recent European Council in Göteborg. In this 
context, global Climate change, energy security, sustainable transport, protection of nature, 
sustainable management of Europe’s natural resources, and their interaction with human 
activities motivate this research action priority theme. The activities carried out within this 
priority area aim to at strengthening the scientific and technological capacities needed for 
Europe to be able to implement a sustainable development model in the short and in the 
long term, integrating its social, economic and environmental dimensions, and make a 
significant contribution to the international efforts to mitigate or even to reverse current 
adverse trends, to understand and control global change and preserve the equilibrium of 
ecosystems. 

1.1.6.1 Sustainable Development energy systems 
Strategic objectives address the reduction of greenhouse gases and pollutant emissions, the 
security of energy supply, the increased use of renewable energy the balanced use of the 
various transport modes, as well as to achieve an enhanced competitiveness of European 
industry. Achieving these objectives in the short term requires a large-scale research effort to 
encourage the deployment of technologies already under development and to help promote 
changes in energy demand patterns and consumption behaviour by improving energy 
efficiency and integrating renewable energy into the energy system. and transport demand 
patterns. The longer term implementation of sustainable development requires also an 
important an equally strong RTD effort to assure the economically attractive availability, of 
energy, and overcome the potential barriers to adoption of renewable energy sources and 
new carriers and technologies such as hydrogen and fuel cells that are intrinsically clean. 

Research priorities 

i) Research activities having an impact in the short and medium term 

Community RTD activity is one of the main instruments which can serve to support the 
implementation of new legislative instruments in the field of energy and to change 
significantly current unsustainable patterns of development, which are characterised by 
growing dependence on imported fossil fuels, continually rising energy demand, increasing 
congestion of the transport systems, and growing CO2 emissions, by offering new 
technological solution which could positively influence consumer/user behaviour, especially 
in the urban environment in the short and medium term. 

The goal is to bring innovative and cost competitive Proposed technological solutions to 
the market as quickly as possible through demonstration and other research actions 
aiming at the market, which involve consumers / users in pilot environments, and which 
address not only are expected to emerge from, and to be demonstrated in, consumer/user 
pilot-environments, addressing technical but also organisational, institutional, financial and 
social issues. 

– Clean energy, in particular renewable energy sources and their integration in the 
energy system, including storage, distribution and use. 
36



The aim is to bring to the market improved renewable energy technologies and 
to integrate renewable energy into networks and supply chains, for example by 
supporting stakeholders who are committed to establishing “Sustainable 
Communities” employing a high percentage of renewable energy supplies. Such 
actions will adopt innovative or improved technical and/or socio-economic 
approaches to “green electricity”, heat, or biofuels and their integration into 
energy distribution networks or supply chains, including combinations with 
conventional large scale energy distribution. 

Research will focus on: increased cost effectiveness, performance and reliability of 
the main new and renewable energy sources; integration of renewable energy and 
effective combination of decentralised sources, with cleaner conventional large-scale 
generation; validation of new concepts for energy storage, distribution and use. 

– Energy savings and energy efficiency, including those to be achieved through the 
use of renewable raw materials. 
The overall objective is to reduce the demand for energy by 18% by the year 
2010 in order to contribute to meeting the EU’s commitments to combat climate 
change and to improve the security of energy supply. Research activities will 
focus in particular on Eco-Buildings to generate energy savings and improve 
environmental quality as well as quality of life for occupants. “Polygeneration” 
activities will contribute to the Community target of doubling the share of 
cogeneration (CHP) in EU electricity generation from 9% to 18% by 2010, and 
improve the efficiency of combined production of electricity, heating and 
cooling services, by using new technologies such as fuel cells and integrate 
renewable energy sources. 

Research will focus on: improving savings and efficiency mainly in the urban 
context, in particular in buildings, through the optimisation and validation of new 
concepts and technologies, including combined heat and power and district 
heating/cooling systems; opportunities offered by on-site production and use of 
renewable energy to improve energy efficiency in buildings. 

– Alternative motor fuels. 
The Commission has set an ambitious target of 20% substitution of diesel and 
gasoline fuels by alternative fuels in the road transport sector by the year 2020. 
The aim is to improve the security of energy supply through reduced 
dependence on imported liquid hydrocarbons and to address the problem of 
greenhouse gas emissions from transport. In line with the Communication on 
alternative fuels for road transportation, short term RTD will concentrate on 
three types of alternative motor fuels that potentially could reach a significant 
market share: biofuels, natural gas and hydrogen. 

Research will focus on: the integration of alternative motor fuels into the transport 
system, particularly into clean urban transport; the cost-effective and safe 
production, storage, and distribution (including fuelling infrastructure) of alternative 
motor fuels; the optimal utilisation of alternative fuels in new concepts of energy 
efficient vehicles; strategies and tools to manage the market transformation process 
for alternative motor fuels. 

37



– Renewable energy sources, more efficient and clean use of energy, especially in 
urban areas, new concepts of energy efficient and cleaner transport: the objective 
is to develop energy efficient technologies that reduce demand for fossil fuels by 
stimulating energy efficient behaviour in disparate user communities and bring about 
energy savings of 12% by 2010, as well as to tilt the energy balance towards more 
sustainable energy systems, which combine heat and power as well as new and 
renewable sources and thereby increase the share of renewable energy systems form 
6% to 12% by 2010. 
Research will focus on: increased cost efficiency and reliability of the main new and 
renewable sources, and their combination with conventional large-scale and 
distributed generation; efficiency in building, district heating systems and CHP; 
demand side action for reducing gas and electricity consumption; new forms of clean 
urban transport; rationalisation of the use of the private vehicle; integration of new 
concepts for energy efficient vehicles and new/alternative fuels. 

ii) Research activities having an impact in the medium and longer term 

In the medium and longer term the objective is to develop new and renewable energy 
sources, and new carriers such as hydrogen technologies and fuel cells which are both 
affordable and intrinsically clean and which can be well integrated in a long term 
sustainable energy supply mix and demand context both for stationary and for transport 
applications. Furthermore the continuing use of fossil fuels in the foreseeable future 
requires cost-effective solutions to the disposal of CO2. The goal is This to bring about 
further reduction in greenhouse gas emissions beyond the Kyoto deadline of 2010. The future 
large-scale development of these technologies will depend on significant improvement in their 
cost and other aspects of competitiveness against conventional energy sources, within the 
overall socio-economic and institutional context in which they are deployed. 

– Fuel cells, including their applications: these represent an emerging technology 
which is expected, in the longer term, to replace a large part of the current 
combustion systems in industry, buildings and road transport, as they have a higher 
efficiency, lower pollution levels and a potential for lower cost. The long term cost 
target is 50 euro/kW for road transport and 300 euro/kW for high-durability 
stationary applications and fuel cell/electrolysers. 
Research will focus on: cost reduction in fuel cell production and in applications for 
buildings, transport and de-centralised electricity production; advanced materials 
related to low and high temperature fuel cells for the above applications. 

– New technologies for energy carriers/transport and storage, in particular 
hydrogen: The objective to establish hydrogen as an energy carrier is key in a future 
sustainable energy economy. The long term aim is to achieve an energy cost which is 
equivalent to that of conventional fuels without tax. The aim is to develop new 
concepts for long term sustainable energy supply where hydrogen and clean 
electricity are seen as major energy carriers. For H2, the means must be 
developed to ensure its safe use at an equivalent cost to that of conventional 
fuels. For electricity, decentralised new and in particular renewable energy 
resources, must be optimally integrated, within inter-connected European, 
regional and local distribution networks to provide secure and reliable high 
quality supply. 
38



Research will focus on : Clean cost-effective production of hydrogen from fossil 
fuels (including CO2 capture and underground storage); hydrogen production e.g. 
by electrolysis from renewable and nuclear energy; hydrogen infrastructure 
including transport, distribution, storage and utilisation; For electricity the focus 
will be on new concepts, for analysis, planning, control and supervision of 
electricity supply and distribution and on enabling technologies, for storage, 
interactive transmission and distribution networks. 

– New and advanced concepts in renewable energy technologies: Solar photovoltaic 
technologies and biomass: photovoltaics Renewable energy technologies have, in 
the long term, the potential to make a large contribution to the world and EU energy 
supply. The focus will be on technologies with a significant future energy 
potential and requiring long-term research, by means of actions with high 
European added value in particular objective is to overcome the major bottleneck 
of high investment costs, which, should be reduced by a factor of 4, and to make 
these technologies. The overall objective for biomass is to make bioenergy 
competitive with conventional fuels. 
Research will focus on (photovoltaics): for photovoltaics : the whole production 
chain from basic material to the PV system, as well as on the integration of PV in 
habitat and large scale MW-size PV systems for production of electricity. For 
biomass barriers in the biomass supply-use chain will be addressed in the following 
areas: production, combustion technologies, gasification technologies for electricity 
and H2/syngas production and biofuels for transport. For other areas the effort will 
be focused on integrating at European level specific aspects of RTD activities 
which require long term research. 

– Capture and sequestration of CO2, associated with cleaner fossil fuel plants: Cost 
effective capture and sequestration of CO2 is essential to include the use of fossil 
fuels in a sustainable energy supply scenario, reducing costs to the order of 30€ 
in the medium term and 20€ or less in the longer term per tonne of CO2 for 
capture rates above 90%. 
Research will focus on : developing holistic approaches to near zero emission fossil 
fuel based energy conversion systems, low cost CO2 separation systems, both precombustion and post-combustion as well as oxyfuel and novel concepts: development 
of safe, cost efficient and environmentally compatible CO2 disposal options, in 
particular geological storage, and exploratory actions for assessing the potential of 
chemical storage. 

1.1.6.2 Sustainable surface transport 
The Common Transport Policy White Paper: “European transport policy for 2010: time 
to decide” forecasts a transport demand growth by 2010 in the European Union of 38% for 
freight and 24% for passenger transport (base-year 1998). The already congested transport 
networks will have to absorb the additional traffic, and the trend suggests that the proportion 
absorbed by the less sustainable modes is likely to grow. The objective is consequently both 
to fight against congestion and to decelerate or even reverse theseis unsustainable trends 
regarding the modal split by better integrating and rebalancing the different transport 
modes, improving their safety, performance and efficiency, minimising their impact on 
the environment and ensuring the development of a genuinely sustainable European 

39



transport system, while supporting European industry’s competitiveness in the 
production and operation of transport means and systems. Short and medium term actions 
will develop and integrate new concepts and technologies into the transport system. 

Research priorities: 

i) Developing environmentally friendly transport systems and means of transport. 
The objective is to reduce the contribution of surface transport (rail, road, 
waterborne) to CO2 production and other emissions including noise, while 
increasing safety, comfort, quality, cost-effectiveness and energy-efficiency of 
vehicles and vessels. Emphasis will be given to clean urban transport and 
rational use of the car in the city. 
– New technologies and concepts for all surface transport modes (road, rail and 
waterborne). 
Research will focus on: high efficiency propulsion systems and their components, 
based on alternative and renewable fuels, taking into account the fuelling 
infrastructure; development of zero or near zero emission propulsion systems and 
components, in particular those integrating fuel cells, hydrogen combustion and 
their fuelling infrastructure into the transport system; integrated concepts for clean 
urban transport and rational use of the car in urban locations. 
– Advanced design and production techniques. 
Research will focus on: “transport-specific” advanced design and production 
techniques, in particular for one-of-a-kind production environments, leading to 
improved quality, safety, recycling, comfort and cost-effectiveness of environmentally 
friendly vehicles (cars and trains) and vessels. 
ii) Making surface transport safer, more effective and more competitive. The 
objectives are to assure transport of passengers and freight, taking into account 
transport demand and the need for rebalancing transport modes, while 
increasing transport safety in line with the 2010 objectives for European 
transport policy (eg for road transport the objective would be to halve the 
number of fatalities). 
– Rebalancing and integrating different transport modes. 
Research will focus on: interoperable transport systems, to enable the interconnectivity of the transport networks, in particular enabling a competitive 
European railway system and the integration of a European vessel traffic 
information system; intermodal transport services, technologies (eg harmonisation of 
unit loads) and systems, and advanced logistics; 

40



– Increasing road, rail and waterborne safety and avoiding traffic congestion. 
Research will focus on : strategies and technologies to increase road safety and to 
improve maritime safety; concepts and systems for advanced human-vehicle, vehiclevehicle and vehicle-infrastructure interaction; large-scale integration and validation 
platforms for intelligent transport systems (e.g. transport pricing, transport and 
traffic management and transport information), including satellite navigation 
applications, new vehicle types and operational procedures to increase capacity and 
safety, while respecting the environment (in particular in urban and sensitive areas). 

Research will focus on: safer and more environmentally friendly transport, in 
particular for the road and maritime sectors; integration of intelligent transport 
systems for the efficient management of infrastructure; enabling railway 
interoperability; development of intermodality for passengers and freight, in 
particular through better management of the logistic chain and standardisation of 
loading units. 

1.1.6.3 Global Change and ecosystems 
Global Change encompasses the complex dynamic changes over different time-scales in the 
physical, chemical and biological components of the Earth system (i.e. atmosphere, oceans 
and land) in particular those influenced by human activities. The objectives of this priority 
area is are: (i) to strengthen the capacity to understand, detect and predict global change and 
develop strategies for prevention, mitigation and adaptation, in particular in relation to all 
types of greenhouse gases, in close liaison with the relevant international research 
programmes and in the context of relevant conventions such as the Kyoto Protocol and the 
Montreal Protocol; (ii) to preserve the ecosystems and protect biodiversity which would 
also contribute to the sustainable use of land and marine resources. In the context of 
global change, strategies for integrated, sustainable management of agricultural and 
forest ecosystems are of particular importance for the preservation of these ecosystems 
and will contribute substantially to the sustainable development of Europe. Such an 
These objectives will be best achieved through activities aiming at the development of 
common and integrated approaches necessary to implement sustainable development, taking 
into account its environmental, economic and social aspects, as well as the impact of global 
change on all countries and regions of the world. It will foster the convergence of European 
and national research efforts for a consensual common definitions of the scientific thresholds 
of sustainability and estimation methods, and encourage international co-operation in order to 
achieve common strategies to respond to global change issues. 

Research priorities 

– Impact and mechanisms of greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric pollutants 
on climate, ozone depletion and carbon sinks (oceans, forests and soil). The 
objective is to detect and describe global change processes, associated with 
greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric pollutants from all sources, 
including those resulting from energy supplies, transport and agriculture, to 
improve prediction and assessment of their global and regional impacts, evaluate 
mitigation options and improve the access of European researchers to facilities and 
platforms for global change research. 
41



Research will focus on: understanding and quantification of changes in the carbon 
and nitrogen cycles; and theroleof all sources of all greenhouse gases and 
atmospheric pollutants and their sinks in the terrestrial and ocean biosphere; 
influence of and their effects on climate dynamics and variability, ocean and 
atmospheric chemistry, and their interactions; future stratospheric ozone levels and 
ultraviolet radiation; understanding and prediction of global climatic change and 
impacts; global climatic change; associated phenomena (e.g. El Niño, stratospheric 
ozone depletion, changes in sea level and ocean circulation); and impacts mitigation 
and adaptation strategies. 

– Water cycle, including soil-related aspects : the objective is to understand the 
mechanisms and assess the impact of global change and in particular climate change 
on the water cycle, water quality and availability, as well as soil functions and 
quality to provide the bases for management tools for water systems to mitigate the 
impacts. 
Research will focus on: impact and feedback of climate change on the components 
of the hydrological variables, cycle – land/ocean/atmosphere interactions, 
groundwater/surface water distribution, freshwater and wetland ecosystems,soil 
functioning and water quality; the driving role of oceans in the global water cycle; 
assessment of vulnerability of water/soil systems to global change; management 
strategies and their impacts; scenarios of water demand and availability. 

– Biodiversity, protection of genetic resources, functioning of terrestrial and marine 
and ecosystems and interactions between human activities and the latter:the 
objectives are to develop a better understanding of marine and terrestrial biodiversity 
and of ecosystem functioning, understand and minimise the impacts of human 
activities on them and ensure sustainable ility management of natural resources and 
terrestrial and marine ecosystems and the protection of genetic resources. 
Research will focus on: assessing and forecasting changes in biodiversity, structure, 
function and dynamics of ecosystems and their services; with emphasis on marine 
ecosystems’ functioning; relationships between society, economy, biodiversity and 
habitats; integrated assessment of drivers affecting ecosystems’ functioning and 
biodiversity, and mitigation options of biodiversity loss; risk assessment, 
management, conservation and rehabilitation options in relation to terrestrial and 
marine ecosystems. 

– Mechanisms of desertification and natural disasters connected with climate 
change: the objective is to understand elucidate the links between climatic change 
and the mechanisms of desertification and natural disasters, including their links 
with climatic change so as to improve risk and impact assessment and forecasting, 
and decision support methodologies, and strategies for sustainable land and coastal 
management. 
Research will focus on: large scale integrated assessment of land/soil degradation 
and desertification in Europe and related prevention and mitigation strategies; long 
term forecasting of hydro-geological hazards associated with global climate change; 
natural hazard monitoring, mapping and management strategies; improved disaster 
preparedness and mitigation. 

42



– Strategies for sustainable land management, including coastal zones, agricultural 
land and forests. The objective is to contribute to the development of strategies 
and tools for sustainable use of land, with emphasis on the coastal zones, 
agricultural lands and forests, including integrated concepts for the 
multipurpose utilisation of agricultural and forest resources, and the integrated 
forestry/wood chain in order to ensure sustainable development at economic, 
social, and at environmental levels. 
Research will focus on: development of the necessary tools for integrated 
management of coastal zones (ICZM); evaluation of positive and negative 
externalities under different production systems for agriculture and forestry; 
development of strategies for sustainable forest management considering regional 
specificity; strategies/concepts for sustainable management and multipurpose 
utilisation of forest and agriculture resources; cost-efficiency of new environmentalfriendly processes and recycling technologies within the integrated forestry/wood 
chain. 

– Operational forecasting and modelling, including global climate change 
observationing systems: the objective is to make systematic observations of 
atmospheric, terrestrial and oceanic parameters including those of climate 
parameters so as to strengthen climate change research, improve forecasting of the 
marine, terrestrial and atmospheric environment, consolidate long-term 
observations for the modelling andinparticular prediction, improve forecasting of 
the marine, terrestrial and atmospheric environment, establish common European 
data bases and contribute to international programmes. 
Research will focus on: observations of basic marine, terrestrial and atmospheric 
parameters necessary for global climate change research and management 
strategies, and of extreme events; large observing/monitoring/ surveying/operational 
forecasting/modelling networks (taking into account the developments of GMES and 
providing the European dimension to G3OS). 

– Complementary research will focus on: development of advanced methods for risk 
assessment and methods for appraising environmental quality, including relevant 
prenormative research on measurements and testing for these purposes. 
The research activities carried out within this thematic priority area will include 
exploratory research at the leading edge of knowledge on subjects closely related to one 
or more topics within it. Two complementary approaches will be utilised: one receptive 
and open – the other proactive. 

1.1.7 Citizens and Governance in the European a Knowledge-based society 
The Lisbon European Council recognised that the transition towards a European knowledge 
based society will affect every aspect of people’s lives. The overall objective is to provide a 
sound knowledge base for the management of this transition, which will be conditioned by 
national, regional and local policies, programmes and actions, as well as informed decision 
making by individual citizens, families and other societal units. 

43



Given the complexity, breadth and interdependence of these challenges and the issues 
involved, the research approach adopted must be based on greatly enhanced research 
integration, multi and transdisciplinary cooperation, and on the mobilisation of the social 
sciences and humanities research communities in Europe in addressing them. Activities will 
also facilitate the identification of medium to long term societal challenges arising from 
research in social sciences and humanities and will ensure the active participation of key 
societal stakeholders and the targeted dissemination of the work carried out. In order to 
support the development of comparative transnational and interdisciplinary research, while at 
the same time preserving the diversity of research methodologies throughout Europe, the 
collection and analysis of better and more genuinely comparable data and the coordinated 
development of statistics and qualitative and quantitative indicators in particular in the context 
of the emerging knowledge society at the European level is essential. 

Appropriate coordination of socio-economic research and foresight elements across all the 
Priorities of this programme the Specific Programmes will be assured . 

Research priorities 

i) Knowledge-based European Society and social cohesion 

The building of a European knowledge society is a clear political objective for the European 
Community. The research aims to provide the basis of understanding needed to ensure this 
takes place in a manner which accords with specific European conditions and aspirations. 

– Improving the generation, distribution and use of knowledge and its impact on 
economic and social development. The objective is to improve significantly 
understanding of the characteristics of knowledge and its functioning as a public and 
private good, and to provide the bases for policy formulation and decision making. 
Research will focus on: characteristics of knowledge and its functioning in relation 
to the economy and society, aswell asfor and innovation and for entrepreneurial 
activities; and the transformation of economic and social institutions; the dynamics 
of knowledge production, distribution and use, role of knowledge codification and 
impact of ICTs ; the importance of territorial structures and social networks in these 
processes. 

– Options and choices for the development of a knowledge-based society serving the 
EU objectives set at the Lisbon summit: The objective is to develop an integrated 
understanding of how a knowledge-based society can promote the societal objectives 
of the EU set at the Lisbon summit and subsequent European Councils of 
sustainable development, social and territorial cohesion and improved quality of life, 
with due consideration to the variety of social models in Europe. 
Research will focus on: features of a knowledge based society in line with European 
social models and the need to improve the quality of life; social and territorial 
cohesion, gender and intergenerational relations and social networks; implications 
of changes to work and employment, and the labour market; access to education 
and training, and life-long learning. 

– The variety of paths towards a knowledge society. The objective is to provide 
comparative perspectives across Europe and thus provide an improved basis for the 
44



formulation and implementation of transition strategies towards a knowledge society 
at the national and regional levels. 

Research will focus on: globalisation in relation to pressures for convergence; the 
implications for regional variation; challenges to European societies from a 
diversity of cultures and increased sources of knowledge; the role of the media in 
this context. 

ii) Citizens, Citizenship, democracy and new forms of governance. 

The work will identify the main factors influencing changes in governance and citizenship, in 
particular in the context of increased integration and globalization and from the 
perspectives of history and cultural heritage as well as the impacts of these changes and the 
possible options to enhance democratic governance, resolve conflicts, protect human rights 
and take account of cultural diversity and multiple identities. 

– The implications of European integration and enlargement for governance and the 
citizen: The objective is to clarify the key interactions between European integration 
and enlargement, and issues of democracy, institutional arrangements and citizens’ 
well-being. 
Research will focus on: relationships between integration, enlargement and 
institutional change within a the context of their historical evolution and with a 
comparative perspective; the implications of a changing global context and the role 
of Europe; the consequences of an enlarged European Union for the well-being of its 
citizens. 

– Articulation of areas of responsibility and new forms of governance: The objective 
are to support the development of forms of multi-level governance which are 
accountable, legitimate, and sufficiently robust and flexible to address societal 
change including integration and enlargement, and to assure the effectiveness and 
legitimacy of policy making. 
Research will focus on: the articulation of responsibilities between various 
territorial levels and between public and private sectors; democratic governance, 
representative institutions and roles of civil society organisations; privatisation, the 
public interest, new regulatory approaches, corporate governance; implications for 
legal systems. 

– Security Issues connected with the resolution of conflicts and restoration of peace 
and justice: the objectives are to support the development of institutional and social 
capacity in the field of conflict resolution, identify factors leading to success or 
failure in preventing conflict, and develop improved options for conflict mediation. 
Research will focus on: early identification of factors leading to conflict within and 
between countries; comparative analysis of procedures for prevention and mediation 
of conflicts and achievement of justice in different fields; Europe’s role in regional 
and international arenas in these respects. 

– New forms of citizenship and cultural identities: The objectives are to promote 
citizens’ involvement and participation in European policy making, as well as to 
understand perceptions and impacts of European citizenship and human rights 
45



provisions in Europe, and factors that allow mobility and coexistence of multiple 
identities.and to identify factors that allow mobility and coexistence of multiple 
identities. 

Research will focus on: relations between new forms of citizenship including rights 
of non-citizens; tolerance, human rights, racism and xenophobia; the role of the 
media in the development of a European public sphere; evolution of citizenship and 
identities in a context of cultural, and other diversities in Europe, taking into 
account and increasing population flows; social and cultural dialogue within 
Europe and with other world regions; implications for the development of a 
European knowledge based society. 

The research activities carried out within this thematic priority area will include 
exploratory research at the leading edge of knowledge on subjects closely related to one 
or more topics within it. Two complementary approaches will be utilised: one receptive 
and open – the other proactive. 

1.2. SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES COVERING A WIDER FIELD OF RESEARCH 
Activities under this heading will complement research within the thematic priority areas and 
comprise the following: 

– Anticipating the EU’s scientific and technological needs 
– Specific research activities for SMEs 
– Specific international co-operation activities 
1.2.1 Anticipating the EU’s scientific and technological needs Supporting policies and 
anticipating scientific and technological needs 
These activities have a distinct role within the overall architecture of the Framework 
Programme 2002-2006. They involve common implementation arrangements, and the 
necessary critical mass, to assure efficient and flexible conduct of research which is essential 
to the fundamental objectives of Community research and which covers a wide range of needs 
that cannot be satisfied within the thematic priorities. They will have the following specific 
objectives: 

– To underpin the formulation and implementation of Community policies, bearing on 
the interests of possible future members of the Union as well as the existing member 
states, and monitor their effects; 
– To explore new and emerging scientific and technological problems and 
opportunities, including in particular interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research 
areas, where European action is appropriate in view of the potential to develop 
strategic positions at the leading edge of knowledge and in new markets, or to 
anticipate major issues facing European society. 
46



A feature common to these activities is that they will be implemented within a multi-annual 
perspective which takes direct account of the needs and viewpoints of the main associated 
actors (as appropriate: policymakers, industrial user groups, leading edge research groups, 
etc.) They will be implemented in conjunction with an annual flexible programming 
mechanism to be implemented during the course of the programme,by which specific 
priorities, corresponding to identified needs and falling within the objectives indicated above, 
will be determined. 

Priorities thus determined will then be inscribed in the workprogramme for the specific 
programme, alongside the priorities deriving from objectives in other parts of the programme, 
and updated regularly. This will result in a progressive allocation of the budget relating to 
these activities to the specific priorities identified, throughout the period of execution. 

The programming will be carried out by the Commission, and will be based on suggestions 
received in response to a wide-ranging consultation of interested circles in the EU and the 
countries associated with the Framework Programme, regarding the topics to be included. 

A budget A first allocation of Euro 440 350 million will be allocated made to the research 
activities specified below, which have been determined on the basis of needs which can be 
identified now; This represents 50% of the amount destined for all activities under this 
heading; the remaining 50% EUR 220 million will be allocated to research activities to be 
defined during the course of implementation of the specific programme. 

i) Policy-orientated research 

The activities under this heading will provide, in particular, support for: 

– the implementation of common policies, in particular the common agricultural policy 
(CAP), and the common fisheries policy (CFP); 
– the achievement of sustainable development, in particular the Community policy 
objectives relatingtoenvironment (including in particular those set out in the 6th 
Environment Action Programme21); energy (the Green Paper “Towards a European 
strategy for the security of energy supply”22);and transport (the White Paper on 
European transport policy23); 
– as well as those in such fields as other Community policies, namely health (in 
particular public health), and, gender equality, regional development, trade, 
enlargementdevelopment aid, internal market and competitiveness, social policy 
and employment, education training and culture, gender equality, consumer 
protection, the creation of an area of freedom, security and justice, external 
relations including those policies in support of enlargement, and including the 
requisite statistical methods and tools; and development aid, and justice and 
internal affairs. 
– the achievement of other important objectives of the Community policy objectives 
deriving , such as those set by the European Commission for the five years of its 
21 

COM(2001)31. 

22 

COM(2000)769. 

23 

COM(2001)370. 

47



mandate and those derived from the political orientations given by the European 
Council, including the Lisbon strategy, with regard to, for instance, economic 
policy, in the fields of the Information Society,aswell as and e-Europe, and 
enterprise, internal market and competitiveness, social policy and employment, and 
education and culture., including the requisite statistical methods and tools. 

They may include pre-normative research, measurement and testing where necessary 
for the needs of community policies. 

Multi-annual programming 

The multi-annual programming of these activities will take into account the opinions of the 
relevant Scientific Committees associated with the policies concerned. The programming will 
be conducted with the help of a User Group composed of different Commission Services, who 
will also have recourse, where appropriate, to an independent consultation structure composed 
of high-level scientific and industrial experts. The User Group will assess suggestions put 
forward regarding the topics to be included on the basis of the following criteria: 

– their contribution to policy formulation and development (e.g. links with legislative 
proposals in preparation or with major deadlines in the area); 
– their potential contribution to the EU’s competitiveness, the strengthening of its 
scientific and technological bases and the achievement of the European Research 
Area, including the effective integration of the candidate countries. 
– European added value, taking account in particular of research carried out in the 
Member States in the relevant fields; 
– the scientific relevance and feasibility of the research themes and approaches 
proposed; 
– assurance of an appropriate division of tasks, and synergy, between these activities 
and the Direct Actions of the Joint Research Centre in support of Community 
policies. 
The programming may be altered by means of an emergency procedure based on the same 
evaluation criteria in the event of a crisis giving rise to urgent and unforeseen research needs. 

Initial research priorities 

The programming method described above has been applied to define Policy-orientated 
research priorities responding to immediate needs that can already be anticipated. In this first 
application, it has been are based on suggestions for topics made by the Commission’s policy 
services, drawing on the advice, as appropriate, of the relevant Scientific Committees, as well 
as the broader objectives of the Union as set out in successive conclusions of the meetings of 
the European Council. The priorities so defined will be incorporated in the workprogramme at 
the start of the programme. 

They have been grouped within the following lines of action, in a structure which optimises 
synergies between different policy requirements and scientific inputs, and which cuts across 
and complements the thematic priorities: 

48



– Sustainable management of Europe’s natural resources. Research under this 
heading responds to policy requirements relating, in particular, to the modernisation 
and sustainability of the common agriculture and fisheries policies and the promotion 
of rural development, including forestry. It will focus on: 
the modernisation and sustainability of agriculture and forestry, including their 
multifunctional role in order to ensure the sustainable development and promotion 
of rural areas; 

tools and assessment methods for sustainable agriculture and forestry 
management; 

the modernisation and sustainability of fisheries policy, including aquaculturebased production systems; 

new and more environment friendly production methods to improve animal health 
and welfare; 

environmental assessment (soil, water, air, noise, including the effects of chemical 
substances). 

Development of bases for policies to promote sustainable, quality-based agriculture; 
definition of multifunctional models of sustainable agriculture and forestry 
management, benefits and trade-impact assessment; improved tools for forecasting 
and assessment of international agriculture policies and markets and related 
agreements, and the common agriculture policy; environmental implications of 
agriculture, fisheries and aquaculture-based production systems, including non-food 
agriculture, and their interactions; characterisation of spatial entities, and related 
drivers of change for assessment of rural development and to provide tools to 
support environmental impact assessment; development of evaluation and 
monitoring tools for animal health and welfare. 

Development of alternative approaches to fisheries management, through better 
understanding of key biological and selectivity parameters within an eco-system 
based approach; integration of multi-annual, multi-species and socio-economic 
aspects, and assessment of uncertainties; improvement of monitoring control and 
surveillance methods; development of bases for policies to promote sustainable 
acquaculture through, disease prevention, production systems diversification and 

Better understanding of the structure and functioning of terrestrial and marine 
ecosystems, including the assessment of soil functions and degradation processes; 
tools for assessing water quality status, contaminant concentrations and 
improvement options; integrated air pollution assessment; strategic noise mapping. 

– Providing health, security and opportunity to the people of Europe. Research in this 
category responds to policy requirements relating, in particular, to the 
implementation of the European Social Agenda including future social policy 
issues, public health and consumer protection and the creation of an Area of 
Freedom, Security and Justice. It will focus on: 
49



health determinants and the provision of high quality and sustainable health care 
services and pension systems (in particular in the context of ageing and 
demographic change); 

public health issues, including epidemiology contributing to disease prevention 
and responses to emerging rare and communicable diseases, allergies, procedures 
for secure blood and organ donations, non-animal test methods; 

the impact of environmental issues on health (including methods for risk 
assessment and the mitigation of risks of natural disasters to people); 

issues relating to handicapped/disabled people (including equal access facilities) 

understanding of migration and refugee flows; 

understanding crime trends in the context of public safety; 

issues related to civil protection, including biosecurity, and crisis management. 

Methods to evaluate the need for, and performance and efficiency of, social and 
consumer policy measures, including aspects related to consumer satisfaction, unfair 
practices and impacts of other EU policies; the transformation of the labour market, 
and the cost of “non-social Europe”, development of co-ordinated approaches and a 
comparative European knowledge base for policies to ensure sustainable pension 
and health care systems, in particular with respect to the impact of demographic 
change and ageing; development of improved methods for risk assessment, including 
non-animal test methods for chemical substances, measures related to product 
safety, and communication of emerging threats to consumers’ and workers’ health 
and safety. 

Comparative assessment of health determinants, including nutrition, gender-related 
and socio-economic factors, of health services and e-health systems, and methods for 
intervention quality assessment; development of improved incidence measurement 
and understanding of transmission paths for emerging, rare and communicable 
diseases, including in the international context; development of safe and secure 
procedures for blood and organ donation, storage and use; methods to assess the 
distribution, and socio-economic impact, of disabilities. 

Comparative research on factors underlying migration and refugee flows, including 
illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings, improved means to anticipate 
crime trends and causes, and to assess the effectiveness of crime-prevention policies; 
assessment of new challenges related to illicit drug use. 

– Underpinning the economic potential and cohesion of a larger and more 
integrated European Union. Research in this category responds, in particular, to the 
needs of a series of policies concerned with the competitiveness, dynamism and 
integration of the European economy, in the context of enlargement, globalisation 
and Europe’s commercial relations with the rest of the world. It will focus on: 
underpinning European integration, sustainable development, competitiveness and 
trade policies (including improved means to assess economic development and 
cohesion); 

50



the development of tools , indicators and operational parameters for assessing 
sustainable transport and energy systems performance (economic, environmental 
and social); 

global security analysis and validation systems for transport and research relating 
to accident risks and safety in mobility systems; 

forecasting and developing innovative policies for sustainability in the medium and 
long term; 

Information Society issues (such as management and protection of digital assets, 
and inclusive access to the information society); 

the protection of cultural heritage; 

improved quality, accessibility and dissemination of European statistics 

Improved means to assess economic effectiveness and social impacts of monetary 
and fiscal policies, the contribution of financial market integration to economic 
development in the Euro area ; the impact of cohesion policies on sustainable 
regional development; efficiency of sustainable development policies on key business 
sectors, to assess the economic/industrial impact of biotechnologies; methods of 
standardisation as tools to support internal market policies and to underpin 
Community trade policy positions and mutual recognition agreements. 

Development of bases for a comprehensive approach to transport security (in 
particular for air transport); development of tools, indicators and operational 
parameters to assess sustainable transport and energy system performance 
(economic, environmental, social), and monitor achievement of targets, in the 
enlarged Europe; forecasting tools, incorporating socio-economic and technological 
aspects, and cost-effective data sourcing, for energy and transport, to enable 
validation of proposed measures, including technological and market-based 
measures, and to assist in the development of innovative policies and policy 
packages to assure sustainability in the medium and long term. 

Assessment of means for management and protection of digital identities and digital 
assets; assessment of policies, policy tools and best practice for promoting inclusive 
and secure access to the information society, benchmarking of government process 
re-engineering best practices to improve public services; e-education and associated 
contexts of learning, including lifelong learning; consumer protection in relation to 
information and communications services; damage assessment methods and 
conservation strategies to protect cultural heritage; development of advanced 
methods and techniques to improve the quality, accessibility and dissemination of 
statistics produced by the European statistical system. 

A co-ordinated approach will be ensured when addressing research questions that are 
common to different policy areas, in particular with respect to the measurement and impact 
assessment of demographic changes and more broadly in the development of policy-relevant 
statistics and indicators. 

ii) Research to explore new and emerging scientific and technological problems and 
opportunities 

51



Research under this heading will respond to needs in new interdisciplinary and 
multidisciplinary areas or areas at the leading edge of knowledge, and which fall within the 
legitimate scope of Community research, as well as and which cut across or lie outside the 
thematic priority areas, in particular because they are highly interdisciplinary and/or 
multidisciplinary. The research will also respond to unexpected major developments. By 
bringing together resources from across the EU, it will aim to put European research in a 
leading position, opening the way or creating new scientific and technological developments. 
It will stimulate the flow of ideas between academia and industry, and allow Europe better to 
exploit its research assets in the drive towards a dynamic knowledge-based society. 

The following areas of activity will be supported initially: 

– Research to assess rapidly new discoveries, or newly-observed phenomena, which 
may indicate emerging risks or problems of high importance to European society, 
and identify appropriate responses to them. 
– Research in emerging areas of knowledge and on future technologies, in particular in 
transdisciplinary fields, which is highly innovative and involves correspondingly 
high (technical) risks. It will be open to any new idea that has significant potential 
for major industrial and/or social impact, or for the development of Europe’s 
research capabilities in the longer term. 
Proposals will be evaluated on the basis of research excellence, potential for future impact, 
and, in the first of these areas particularly, innovativeness. 

Multi-annual programming 

Specific topics within the above categories on which research will be focused during the 
implementation of the programme will be selected by means of the multi-annual 
programming on the basis of their urgency or potential for future societal, industrial, or 
economic relevance, taking account of the ongoing research activities under this heading. The 
assessment of topics will be carried out with the support of an independent consultation 
structure composed of high-level scientific and industrial experts and will also incorporate the 
following criteria: 

– the potential contribution of the research topics proposed for innovation and the EU’s 
competitiveness, the strengthening of its scientific and technological bases and the 
achievement of the European Research Area, including the effective integration of 
the candidate countries; 
– the scientific relevance and timeliness of the research themes and approaches 
proposed. 
The programming may be altered by means of an emergency procedure based on the same 
evaluation criteria in the event of a crisis giving rise to urgent and unforeseen research needs. 

iii) Implementation 

The activities programmed will be carried out by means of calls for proposals. They will 
essentially take the form of: 

52



– Targeted Specific targeted research projects generally of a limited scale, carried out 
by means of partnerships of a size adapted to the needs to be covered. 
– Co-ordination actions, and the networking of research activities carried out at 
national level where the objectives can be achieved by mobilising capacities existing 
in the Member States, candidate countries and other associated states. 

In certain duly justified cases, where the objectives pursued can be better attained in this way, 
limited use may be made of networks of excellence and integrated projects the instruments 
used in the priority thematic areas. 

The proposals will be selected by the Commission following evaluation by independent 
experts. 

Specific support actions may also be used to implement these activities. 

ii) Specific research activities for SMEs 

1.2.2. Horizontal research activities involving SMEs 
Objectives 

Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) play a crucial role in European competitiveness 
and job creation, not only because they represent the overwhelming majority of enterprises in 
Europe, but also because they are the source of dynamism and change in new markets, 
particularly those at the leading edge of technology. Although a heterogeneous community, 
they are all confronted by increased competition resulting from the completion of the 
European internal market and the need to innovate constantly and accommodate advances in 
technology. Besides this, an increasing number of SMEs both need and want to 
internationalise in search of new markets and business opportunities. 

SMEs will participate, for the most part, in the activities implemented under the priority 
thematic areas of research within networks of excellence, and integrated projects and specific 
targeted research projects. In addition, specific schemes for SMEs in the form of actions on 
collective and cooperative research will be set up. These will be addressing primarily the large 
community of SMEs with a capacity to innovate but with limited research capability. 
However, the co-operative research scheme will also allow innovative SMEs to co-operate 
with universities and research centres be extended to provide support for new, high-tech 
SMEs through arrangements catering specifically for their needs. 

Overall, in addition to the horizontal activities for SMEs, at least 15% of the budget 
relating to the “integrating research” seven thematic priorities under part of this programme 
will be allocated to SMEs. 

Collective Research 

Collective research is a form of research undertaken by RTD performers on behalf of 
industrial associations or industry groupings in order to expand the knowledge base of large 
communities of SMEs and thus improve their general standard of competitiveness. Conducted 
on a European basis, through substantial projects of several years duration, this is an efficient 
way of addressing technological needs of significant sections of the industrial community. 

53



Based on schemes existing in many member states, this measure aims at allowing industrial 
groupings to identify and express research needs that are common to large numbers of SMEs 
at European level. It should allow to improve the overall European technological basis of 
whole industrial sectors. By inter-linking industrial groupings in different countries and in 
financing larger projects with an increased responsibility for project co-ordinators, it will 
contribute to structuring the landscape of collective research in line with the objectives of the 
European Research Area. 

Collective research projects could cover, for example : 

– Research aimed at addressing common problems/challenges (e.g. to meet 
regulatory requirements, environmental performance) 
– Pre-normative research (research to provide a scientific base for European norms 
and standards) 
– Research aimed at reinforcing the technological basis of particular sector(s) 
– Development of “technological tools” (e.g. diagnosis, safety equipment) 
Projects will be managed, on the basis of well-defined guidelines, by industrial associations or 
other groupings established at European level, or by at least 2 national industrial 
associations/groupings established in different European countries. European Economic 
Interest Groups representing the interests of SMEs are also eligible. A “core group” of SMEs 
associated to each project will monitor progress from the definition phase of the research to 
the dissemination of the results obtained. 

A 2-step approach is envisaged in identifying topics and selecting proposals (call for outline 
proposals and, after those selected in a first round evaluation have been developed into 
complete proposal(s), evaluation and selection from amongst these). The level of funding and 
contractual arrangements of Collective research projects will depend on their objectives: 

– projects aimed at strengthening the competitiveness of a specific industrial sector 
would benefit from a maximum Community contribution of 50% of the total 
eligible costs. In such cases the contracting party (the industrial groupings) would 
own the results. 
– projects having a strong legislative or “public well-being” content (e.g. 
environmental protection, enhancement of public health), could obtain a higher 
funding. In such cases, the main emphasis will be on a Europe-wide dissemination 
of the research results. 
In all cases, dissemination of the results amongst the SMEs would be foreseen through, for 
example, special training and demonstration (“take-up”) actions. 

Co-operative Research 

Co-operative research is a scheme whereby a limited number of SMEs from different 
countries having specific problems or needs, outsource the required research to an RTD 
performer, while retaining ownership of the results. Projects are relatively short term and may 
address any research topic or field, being based on the specific needs and problems of the 
SMEs concerned. Other (non-SME) enterprises and end-users will be able to participate in co

54



operative research projects, under conditions ensuring they do not assume a dominant role, 
and have restricted access to the results. 

These activities may also be carried out by innovative and high-tech SMEs in cooperation with research centres and universities. 

Young high-technology SMEs, including "start-ups", may need to outsource specific basic 
research requirements to extend or renew the knowledge base underpinning their own 
research activities. In this case, the co-operative research scheme can be used by a single SME 
which needs to co-operate with an RTD performer from another country having the required 
specialised complementary research skills. Special provisions regarding access to the results 
will apply for such cases. 

Co-operative research will be implemented via an open call for proposals. Information and 
advice about the possibilities of SME involvement will be ensured via entry points set up 
by the Commission, and by making use of the national contact point scheme. This 
activity will also be responsible for the co-ordination of a dedicated network of SME National 
Contact Points in the Member States and Associated States, providing SMEs at regional and 
national level with information and assistance on their participation in the Framework 
Programme, including in Networks of Excellence and Integrated Projects. Close co-ordination 
with the Economic and Technological Intelligence Actions and with the innovation support 
services, implemented under the heading "Research and Innovation", will ensure that SMEs 
benefit from all the foreseen instruments and activities. 

iii) Specific international co-operation activities 

1.2.3. Specific measures in support of international co-operation 
The general objective of the international cooperation activities carried out under the 
Framework Programme is to help open up the European Research Area to the rest of the 
world. These activities represent the particular contribution of the Framework Programme to 
this opening-up process, which will require a joint effort by the Community and the Member 
States. 

Under this heading, the activities in question have the following particular objectives: 

– To help European researchers, businesses and research organisations in the EU 
and the countries associated with the Framework Programme to have access to 
knowledge and expertise existing elsewhere in the world. 
– To help ensure Europe’s strong and coherent participation in the research 
initiatives conducted at international level in order to push back the boundaries of 
knowledge or help to resolve the major global issues, for example as regards health 
and environment. 
– To lend support, in the scientific and technological field, to the implementation of 
the Community’s foreign policy and development aid policy. 
Apart from opening up the activities of the seven thematic priorities networks of excellence 
and the integrated projects to participation by third-country researchers and institutions, 
international cooperation activities will take the form of specific activities. 

55



Carried out in support of the Community’s foreign policy and development aid policy, these 
specific activities will concern three groups of countries: the Mediterranean third countries, 
Russia and the CIS countries, and the developing countries. 

They will be carried out in such a way as to complement the participation of researchers and 
entities in those countries in the networks of excellence and integrated projects which are 
open to them and in which they will participate in a variable way depending on the themes 
and countries. 

The research priorities in this category of activities are defined on the basis of the interests 
and objectives of the Community’s political partnership with the different groups of countries, 
as well as their particular economic and social needs. 

They will therefore cover more particularly: 

– In the case of the Mediterranean third countries, in support of the development of 
the Euro-Mediterranean partnership, issues relating to environment, health and 
water issues, as well as protection of the cultural heritage. 
– In the case of Russia and the CIS countries, stabilisation of R&D potential, issues 
relating to changes in the industrial production system, environment and health 
protection and various safety aspects. 
– In the case of the developing countries, the problems of health and public health, 
food security safety, and the rational exploitation of resources. 
These activities will be carried out by means of research, technological development and 
demonstration projects of a limited scale, actions to coordinate national efforts and, where 
necessary, specific support measures. 

Cooperation activities with Russia and the CIS will be carried out in particular through the 
INTAS structure set up jointly by the Community and the Member States. 

In all three cases, one of the major objectives is to help strengthen, stabilise, develop or adapt 
the local research systems. 

Accordingly, the Framework Programme activities will endeavour to strengthen coordination 
and complementarity with activities carried out by means of financial instruments such as, in 
the case of the Mediterranean third countries, the MEDA Programme, in the case of Russia 
and the CIS countries the Tacis Programme and in the case of the developing countries the 
EDF (European Development Fund) and the ALA (Latin America/Asia) Fund. These 
activities can help to promote the development in those countries of human resources for 
research, research infrastructures and capabilities relating to innovation and exploitation of 
results. 

56



2. Strengthening the foundations of the 
European Research Area 
The establishment of the European Research Area depends on improving the coherence and 
co-ordination of research and innovation activities and policies conducted at national, regional 
and European level. 

The objectives of Community action in this field are to stimulate and support programme 
coordination and joint actions conducted at national or regional level among Member States 
and as well as among European organisations and thus help as well as to develop the 
common knowledge base necessary for the coherent development of policies. The activities 
may be implemented in any scientific and technological area, including in the thematic 
priority domains. 

2.1 Co-ordination of research activities Support for the co-ordination of activities 
Coordination of national activities 

The objective is to encourage and support initiatives undertaken by several countries, in 
areas of common strategic interest, to develop synergy between their existing activities 
through coordination of their implementation, mutual opening and mutual access to research 
results, as well as to define and implement joint activities. 

The activities concerned must be understood as programmes or parts of programmes, 
instruments, plans or other initiatives undertaken at national or regional levels and involving 
public funding to support RTD work, the development of research capabilities, and the 
promotion of innovation. The activities may be undertaken directly by public authorities or 
research agencies at national or regional levels or through European co-operation frameworks, 
in particular such as the European Science Foundation (e.g. the EUROCORES 
collaborative scheme of the European Science Foundation. EUROCORES). 

Efforts to encourage co-ordination activities, using a bottom-up approach, will be 
carried out in the whole field of science and technology in areas such as : 

– health: health of key population groups ; major diseases and disorders (e.g. cancer 
diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, hepatitis, visual impairment), rare diseases and 
major diseases linked to poverty in developing countries; activities involved will be 
implemented, for instance, through coordination of research and comparative studies, 
development of European databases and interdisciplinary networks, exchange of 
clinical practice and coordination of clinical trials. 
– biotechnology: non-health and non-food applications. 
– environment: urban environment (including sustainable urban development and 
cultural heritage, including, for example, ecosite concepts); marine environment and 
land/soil management; seismic risk; 
– energy: new generation 
transport and distribution. 
power plants ("near-zero-emission"), energy storage, 

57



The Community will encourage and support initiatives aimed at networking national and 
regional activities and programmes, by supporting: 

– the coordination of independent activities including their mutual opening; 
– the preparation and the management of joint activities. 
For this purpose, the Community will : 

– support proposals selected following their submission in response to an open call 
for proposals (2 evaluations per year). Where appropriate, calls for expressions of 
interest, followed by targeted calls may be published. 
Proposals may cover for instance strategic studies and planning, consultation of the 
research and innovation community, joint calls for proposals and peer review panels, 
exchange and dissemination of information and results, programme monitoring and 
evaluation, exchange of personnel. 

Proposals will be evaluated taking into account in particular the following aspects: 
the scope of the resources mobilised, the scientific and technological relevance and 
impact, the expected improvement in the use of research resources at European level 
and where appropriate their contribution to promoting innovation. 

– Developanintegratedinformation system, which will be easily accessible, userfriendly and updated regularly, to provide relevant information to: 
– policy makers and programme managers: information on national and regional 
research programmes, instruments, research activities undertaken and planned 
to help identify opportunities for co-ordination, networking or joint initiatives; 
– the research community: information on national,regional or joint 
programmes in which they can participate. 
Co-ordination at European level 

The objective is to enhance the complementarity and synergy between Community actions 
undertaken under the Framework Programme and those of other European scientific cooperation organisations as well as among these organisations themselves. Through increased 
co-ordination and collaboration the various European co-operation frameworks will 
contribute more effectively to the overall coherence of European research efforts and the 
establishment of a European Research Area. Community participation in international 
activities can be supported in duly justified cases. 

– Scientific and technological co-operation activities carried out in other European 
co-operation frameworks 
COST is a long-standing bottom-up mechanism that facilitates co-ordination and 
exchanges between nationally funded scientists and research teams in a variety of 
areas. In order for COST to continue to ensure a cost-effective contribution to 
research co-ordination within the European research area, its management 
arrangements must be adapted to the new context. This will entail the establishment 

58



by COST member states of an appropriate organisation to which financial support 
may then be granted under this programme. 

Reinforced co-ordination among the activities of the European Science 
Foundation, COST and the Framework Programme will also be sought in areas 
of common interest. 

Coordination with EUREKA will be strengthened to improve strategic coherence 
and complementarity of funding, in particular in the thematic priority areas. Joint 
information and communication actions will also be organised where appropriate. 

– Collaboration and joint initiatives of specialised European scientific cooperation 
organisations 
With regard to thematic European organisations, such as CERN, ESA, ESO, EMBL, 
ESRF, ILL, the Community will encourage and support specific initiatives aiming at 
strengthening the coherence and synergies between their activities and between them 
and Community actions, in particular through the development of joint approaches 
and actions on issues of common interest. 

2.2 Coherent development of research and innovation policies 
The objective of the activities to be carried out in this area is to encourage the coherent 
development of research and innovation policies in Europe thanks to the early identification 
of challenges and areas of common interest as well as by providing national,regional and 
Community policymakers with knowledge and decision-aiding tools that can help them 
formulate policy. 

The activities to be carried out to this end will take place in the following areas: 

– Analyses and studies; work relating to foresight, statistics and science and 
technology indicators 
These activities will include studies, analyses and foresight activities relating to 
scientific and technological activities and research and innovation policies in the 
context of the implementation of the European Research Area. 

The activities relating to foresight will include in particular the development of 
thematic dialogue platforms and a knowledge base for users and producers of 
prospective analyses, the exploitation of good practices with regard to methodology, 
as well as the preparation of medium and long term scenarios for science and 
technology in Europe. 

Work on indicators will involve the further development of relevant and harmonised 
indicators, taking into account the different dimensions of research and innovation 
and their impact on economy and society, for example for comparing the scientific 
and technological performance of the Member States and regions. 

– Benchmarking of research and innovation policies at national, regional and 
European level 
59



The first exercise to benchmark national RTD policies, which began in 2000, will be 
completed by mid 2002. In the light of this exercise, the methodology of the next 
benchmarking cycles, including the indicators, will be adapted and the exercises will 
be enlarged geographically by opening them up to the countries in the process of 
acceding to the EU and the associated countries, and will be extended to include 
other themes. Special attention will be paid to the dissemination and monitoring of 
the application of best practices in close collaboration with the Member States and 
the research actors. 

The benchmarkingworkin progress in the fieldof innovation (gatheringof 
information about innovation policies in Europe, development of the “innovation 
scoreboard” and organisation of “peer reviews” of innovation policies by “thematic 
clubs” of policymakers) will be extended so as to open them up geographically, in 
social terms as a result of involving the innovation stakeholders, and in regional 
terms. 

– Mapping scientific and technological excellence in Europe 
The activities on mapping excellence will be expanded according to two guidelines, 
increasing the number of themes covered and regularly updating the results. 

Special attention will be paid to the very broad dissemination of the information 
available as well as to the coordination of mapping with the activities aimed at 
promoting the integration of research efforts in Europe. 

– Improving the regulatory and administrative environment for research and 
innovation in Europe 
The objective here is to examine and analyse regulatory and administrative obstacles, 
to identify and disseminate good management practices and to help formulate new 
approaches. The following are some of the areas that will be concerned: intellectual 
and industrial property; public-private relations with regard to research and 
innovation; the exploitation and dissemination of knowledge; the rules governing 
access to new products or services on the market; mechanisms for funding research 
and innovation and encouraging investment, in particular by the private sector. 

60



ANNEX II
INDICATIVE BREAKDOWN OF THE AMOUNT


Types of activities Amount (EUR million) 
FOCUSING AND INTEGRATING COMMUNITY RESEARCH 12 52524 
Priority thematic areas of research25 
Genomics and biotechnology for health 
Advanced genomics and its applications for health 
Combating major diseases 
Information Society technologies 
Nanotechnologies and nanosciences, intelligent materials, knowledgebased multifunctional materials, and new production processes and 
devices 
Aeronautics and space 
Food quality and safety andhealthrisks 
Sustainable development and global change and ecosystems 
Sustainable energy systems 
Sustainable surface transport 
Global change and ecosystems 
Citizens and governance in the European a knowledge-based society 
11 205 
2 200 
1 150 
1 050 
3 60026 
1 300 
1 075 
685 
2 120 
810 
610 
700 
225 
Anticipating the EU’s scientific and technological needs Specific 
activities covering a wider field of research 
Policy orientated research and leading edge topics Supporting policies 
and anticipating scientific and technological needs 
Specific research activities for SMEs Horizontal research activities 
involving SMEs 
Specific international cooperation activities Specific measures in 
support of international co-operation 
1 320 
570 
450 
300 
STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE EUROPEAN 
RESEARCH AREA 
Support for the co-ordination of activities 
Support for the coherent development of policies 
330 
280 
50 
Total 12 855 

24 

Including EUR 600 million for international co-operation activities, and including any amounts 
provided for under decisions of the European Parliament and Council pursuant to Article 169 of the 
Treaty 

25 

The aim is to allocate at least 15% of the total financial resources assigned to this heading to SMEs. 

26 

Including up to EUR 100 million for the further development of Géant and GRID 

61



ANNEX III – MEANS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAMME


In order to implement the specific programme, and in accordance with the Decisions of the 
European Parliament and of the Council concerning the multiannual Framework Programme 
2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technological development and 
demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research 
Area (2002/…/EC) and with the rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres 
and universities and for the dissemination of research results (2002/…/EC), the Commission 
will use various instruments. 

As regards the thematic priority areas, the importance of the new instruments 
(Integrated Projects and Networks of Excellence) is recognised as being an overall 
priority means to attain the objectives of critical mass, management simplification and 
European added value contributed by Community research in relation to what is 
already undertaken at national level, and of the integration of the research capacities. 
However, the size of projects is not a criterion for exclusion, and access to new 
instruments is ensured for SMEs and other small entities. 

The new instruments will be used from the start of the Sixth Framework Programme in 
each theme and, where deemed appropriate, as a priority means, while maintaining the 
use of specific targeted projects and coordination actions. 

The Commission will evaluate the proposals in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out 
in the above mentioned Decisions in order to verify their relevance with regard to the 
objectives of the programme, their scientific and technological excellence, their Community 
added value and the participants' management capacity. 

The Community contribution will be granted in accordance with the above mentioned 
decisions and in compliance with the Community framework for state aid for research. 
In the case of participation of bodies from regions lagging in development, it may be possible 
to obtain complementary funding from the Structural Funds within the limits specified by 

when a project receives the maximum intensity of co-financing authorised under the 
framework programme or an overall grant, an additional contribution from the 
Structural Funds, pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/99,27 could be granted. 

the Community framework for state aid for research 

In the case of participation of entities from the associated candidate countries, an 
additional contribution from the pre-accession financial instruments could be granted 
under similar conditions. 

In the case of participation of organisations from Mediterranean or developing 
countries, a contribution of the MEDA programme and of the financial instruments of 
the Community’s aid to development could be envisaged. 

In carrying out the programme, the Commission may have recourse to technical 
assistance. 

OJ L 161, 26.6.99. 

62



In 2004 an evaluation will be undertaken by independent experts of the efficiency of 
each of these three types of instruments in the execution of the Sixth Framework 
Programme. 

Actions under Articles 169 and 171 of the Treaty which contribute to the scientific and 
technological objectives set out in Annex I may be supported financially by the specific 
programme, in accordance with the relevant decisions under Article 172 of the Treaty. 

A. NEW INSTRUMENTS 
A.1 Networks of excellence 
Networks of excellence are implemented in the seven priority thematic areas of the 
Framework Programme and, in duly justified cases, in research areas supporting policies and 
anticipating scientific and technological needs. meeting the needs of Community policies 
andas well as innew andemergingareas 

The objective of this instrument is to strengthen European scientific and technological 
excellence by means of a progressive and lasting integration of research capacities existing or 
emerging in Europe at both national and regional level. Each network will aim at advancing 
knowledge in a particular area by assembling a critical mass of skills. 

In general, the network will be organised around a core group of participants to which others 
may be added. In order to create a virtual centre of excellence, they will integrate a 
considerable part or even the totality of their research activities in the area concerned. These 
activities will often be multidisciplinary, and oriented towards long-term objectives and not 
precise predefined results in terms of products, processes or services. 

In addition to these integrated research activities, the network's joint programme of activities 
will also comprise integration activities as well as activities related to spreading of excellence 
outside the network. 

The purpose of networks of excellence is to strengthen and develop Community 
scientific and technological excellence by means of the integration, at European level, of 
research capacities currently existing or emerging at both national and regional level. 
Each network will also aim at advancing knowledge in a particular area by assembling a 
critical mass of expertise. They will foster cooperation between capacities of excellence 
in universities, research centres, enterprises, including SMEs, and science and 
technology organisations. The activities concerned will be generally targeted towards 
long-term, multidisciplinary objectives, rather than predefined results in terms of 
products, processes or services. 

A network of excellence will be implemented by a joint programme of activities 
involving some or, where appropriate, all of the research capacities and activities of the 
participants in the relevant area to attain a critical mass of expertise and European 
added value. A joint programme of activities could aim at the creation of a self-standing 
virtual centre of excellence that may result in developing the necessary means for 
achieving a durable integration of the research capacities. A joint programme of 
activities will necessarily include those aimed at integration, as well as activities related 
to the spreading of excellence and dissemination of results outside the network. 

In pursuing its objectives, the network will therefore carry out: 

63



– Research activities integrated by its participants 
– Integration activities which will comprise in particular: 
– adaptation of the participants' research activities in order to strengthen their 
complementarity; 
– development and utilisation of electronic information and communication 
means, and development of virtual and interactive working methods; 
– short-, medium-and long-term exchanges of personnel, the opening of 
positions to researchers from other members of the network, or their training; 
– development and use of joint research infrastructures, and adaptation of the 
existing facilities with a view to a shared use; 
– joint management and exploitation of the knowledge generated, and actions to 
promote innovation. 
– Activities of spreading of excellence which will comprise, as appropriate: 
– training of researchers; 
– communication concerning the achievements of the network and the 
dissemination of knowledge; 
– services in support of technological innovation in SMEs, aimed in particular at 
the take-up of new technologies; 
– analyses of science/society issues related to the research carried out by the 
network. 
In carrying out some of its activities (such as training of researchers), the network will 
endeavour to ensure publicity by publishing calls for applications. 

The size of the network may vary according to the areas and subjects involved. As an 
indication, the number of participants should not be less than half a dozen. On average, in 
financial terms, the Community contribution to a network of excellence may represent several 
million euros per year. 

The network proposals should comprise the following elements: 

– a general outline of the joint programme of activities, and its content for the first 
yearperiod, broken down into research activities, integration activities, and activities 
for spreading excellence; 
– the role of the participants, identifying the activities and resources that they will 
integrate; 
– the operation of the network (coordination and management of activities); 
– the plan for the dissemination of knowledge and the perspectives as regards 
exploitation of the results. 
64



The partnership may evolve when necessary, within the limit of the initial Community 
contribution, by replacing participants or adding new ones. In most cases, this will be done 
through publication of a competitive call for applications. 

The programme of activities would be updated yearly and would entail a reorientation of 
certain activities or launching of new ones not initially foreseen, which could involve new 
participants. The Commission may launch calls for proposals with a view to the allocation of 
additional contribution in order to cover, for example, an extension of the integrated activities 
of the existing network or the integration of new participants. 

The Community's financial contribution will be a specified amount linked to the 
implementation of a set of work, initially calculated on the basis of the resources dedicated to 
carrying out the joint programme of activity and paid on an annual basis, taking into account 
activities and financial reports. shall take the form of a grant for integration, the amount 
of which is determined in relation to the value of the capacities and resources which all 
the participants propose to integrate. It shall As a complement to the resources of 
deployed by the participants in order to carry out the joint programme of activities. It 
should be sufficient to act as an incentive for integration, but without creating a financial 
dependence that might jeopardise the lasting association of the network. 

A.2 Integrated projects 
Integrated projects will be implemented in the seven priority thematic areas of the Framework 
Programme and, in duly justified cases, in , in research areas supporting policies and 
anticipating scientific and technological needs. meeting the needs arising from the 
implementation of Community policies as well as in new and emerging 

The objective of this instrument is to strengthen European competitiveness or contribute to 
resolve major societal problems by mobilising a critical mass of research and technological 
development resources and skills existing in Europe. 

Accordingly, each integrated project will have the aim of obtaining identifiable scientific and 
technological results applicable to products, processes or services. The activities carried out in 
the context of an integrated project will have by definition clearly defined objectives even in 
the case of risky research. 

In general, the participants in the projects will be organised around a core group made up of 
the main participants. 

Integrated projects are designed to give increased impetus to the Community's 
competitiveness or to address major societal needs by mobilising a critical mass of 
research and technological development resources and competence. Each integrated 
project will be assigned clearly defined scientific and technological objectives and should 
be directed at obtaining specific results applicable in terms of, for instance, products, 
processes or services. Under these objectives they may include more long-term or 
“risky” research. 

Integrated projects will comprise a coherent set of component actions which may vary in 
size and structure according to the tasks to be carried out, each dealing with different 
aspects of the research needed to achieve common overall objectives, and forming a 
coherent whole and implemented in close coordination. 

65



They will be carried out on the basis of overall financing plans preferably involving 
significant mobilisation of public and private sector funding, including funding from 
EIB and collaboration schemes such as Eureka. 

All the activities carried out in the context of an integrated project will be defined in the 
general framework of an "execution implementation plan" comprising activities relating to: 

– research, and as appropriate technological development and/or demonstration; 
– management, dissemination and transfer of knowledge with a view to promoting 
innovation; 
– analysis and assessment of the technologies concerned, as well as the factors relating 
to their exploitation. 
In pursuit of its objectives, it may also comprise activities relating to: 

– training researchers, students, engineers and industrial executives, in particular for 
SMEs; 
– support for the take-up of new technologies, in particular by SMEs; 
– information and communication, and dialogue with the public concerning the 
science/society aspects of the research carried out within the project. 
The size of an integrated project may vary according to the themes and subjects, depending on 
the critical mass necessary in order to obtain the expected results under the best possible 
conditions. 

The combined activities of an integrated project may represent a financial size ranging from 
several million euros to several tens of millions of euros. However, thesizeof projects is not 
a criterion for exclusion, and access to new instruments is ensured for SMEs and other 
small entities. 

In most cases an integrated project will comprise a set of specific actions, relating to certain 
aspects of the research needed to achieve the objectives pursued, of variable sizes and 
structures according to the tasks to be executed, implemented in a closely coordinated 
manner. In some cases, however, an integrated project may take the form of a single large 
project with a single component. 

Integrated project proposals should comprise the following elements: 

– the scientific and technological objectives of the project; 
– the main lines and timetable of the execution plan, highlighting the articulation of the 
various components; 
– the stages of implementation and the results expected in each one of them; 
– the role of the participants within the consortium and the specific skills of each of 
them; 
– the organisation and management of the project; 
66



– the plan for the dissemination of knowledge and the exploitation of results; 
– the global budget estimate and the budget for the different activities, including a 
financial plan identifying the various contributions and their origin. 
The partnership may evolve when necessary, within the limits of the initial Community 
contribution, by replacing participants or adding new ones. In most cases, this will be done 
through publication of a competitive call for applications. 

The execution implementation plan will be updated yearly. This updating may entail the 
reorientation of certain activities and the launching of new ones. In the latter case, and where 
an additional Community contribution is needed, the Commission will identify these activities 
and the participants who will carry them out, by means of a call for proposals. 

The Community contribution will be part of a financing plan which may involve recourse to 
other financing schemes, in particular Eureka or the instruments of the EIB or the EIF. It may 
amount to up to 50% of the total project budget, broken down into budgets per activity. It will 
be paid annually on the basis of the proposed execution plan, and adjusted according to the 
activities and the financial reports. shall take the form of a grant to the budget, calculated 
as a percentage of the budget allocated by the participants to carry out the project, 
adapted according to the type of activity. 

A.3 Collective research projects for SMEs 
Implemented across the whole field of science and technology, these projects will be carried 
out by research entities for the benefit of industrial associations or groupings, in areas and on 
subjects of interest to a large number of SMEs confronted with common problems. 

B OTHER INSTRUMENTS 

In order to implement the programme, la Commission other may also have recourse to 
instruments may also be used: 

– specific targeted projects in order to carry out research or demonstration activities in 
areas meeting the needs of Community policies, new or emerging needs, and specific 
international cooperation activities. 
– cooperative research projects across the whole field of science and technology, to 
enable SMEs to have access to entities with appropriate research capacities to carry 
out specific research activities. 
– coordination and specific support actions in order to achieve the objectives identified 
in the programme and relating to the needs of Community policies, new or emerging 
needs, specific international cooperation activities, and the strengthening of the 
foundations of the European Research Area. 
– accompanying actions by way of additional measures to achieve the objectives of the 
programme or prepare future activities in the context of the Community's research 
and technological development policy. 
67



B1 Specific targeted research projects 

Specific targeted research projects will aim at improving European competitiveness. 
They will be sharply focussed and will take either of the following two forms, or a 
combination of the two: 

(a) a research and technological development project designed to gain new 
knowledge either to improve considerably or to develop new products, processes 
or services or to meet other needs of society and Community policies; 
(b) a demonstration project designed to prove the viability of new technologies 
offering potential economic advantage but which cannot be commercialised 
directly. 
B2 Cooperative research projects for SMEs 

Implemented across the whole field of science and technology, these projects will be 
undertaken for the benefit of a number of SMEs on themes of common interest. 

B3 Coordination actions 

Coordination actions are intended to promote and support the coordinated initiatives of 
a range of research and innovation operators aiming at improved integration. They will 
cover activities such as the organisation of conferences, meetings, the performance of 
studies, exchanges of personnel, the exchange and dissemination of good practices, 
setting up information systems and expert groups, and may, if necessary, include 
support for the definition, organisation and management of joint or common initiatives. 

B4 Specific support actions 

Specific support actions will complement the implementation of the Framework 
Programme and may be used to help in preparations for future Community research 
and technological development policy activities including monitoring and assessment 
activities. In particular, they will involve conferences, seminars, studies and analyses, 
high level scientific awards and competitions, working groups and expert groups, 
operational support and dissemination, information and communication activities, or a 
combination of these, as appropriate in each case. 

68



LEGISLATIVE FINANCIAL STATEMENT


Policy area(s): Research 
Activity(ies): Research actions under the EC Treaty 

TITLE OF ACTION: 

Proposal for a Council Decision adopting a specific programme 
for research, technological development and demonstration 
activities aimed at «Integrating and strengthening the European 
Research Area». 

1. BUDGET LINE(S) + HEADING(S) 
Subsection B6 6 Indirect Actions: these lines will be specified at the beginning of the 
2003 budget procedure, taking into account the ABB nomenclature, which is being 
drawn up. 

2. OVERALL FIGURES 
2.1. Total allocation for action (Part B): €12 505 €12 855 million for commitments 
2.2. Period of application: 
2002-2006 

2.3. Overall multiannual estimate of expenditure: 
a) Schedule of commitment appropriations/payment appropriations (financial 
intervention) (see point 6.1.1 

€ million (to 3rd decimal place) 

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 + Total 
Commitments 2 706.400 
2 776.200 
2 904.300 
2 971.200 
3 053.300 
3 119.200 
3 153.200 
3 217.100 
-11 817.200 
12 083.700 
Payments 376.100 
379.200 
1 627.900 
1 658.400 
2 278.900 
2 323.600 
2 679.300 
2 731.500 
4 855.000 
4 991.000 
11 817 200 
12 083.700 

b) Technical and administrative assistance and support expenditure (see point 6.1.2) 
This budget category does not apply in this field. 

c) Overall financial impact of human resources and other administrative expenditure 

(see points 7.2 and 7.3) 

69 


Commitments/Pa 173.900 172.100 171.100 170.700 -687.800 
yments 
185.800 191.600 195.400 198.500 771.300 

TOTAL 
a+b+c 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 + Total 
Commitments 2 880.300 
2 962.000 
3 076.400 
3 162.800 
3 224.400 
3 314.600 
3 323.900 
3 415.600 
-12 505.000 
12 855.000 
Payments 550.000 
565.000 
1 800.000 
1 850.000 
2 450.000 
2 519.000 
2 850.000 
2 930.000 
4 855.000 
4 991.000 
12 505.000 
12 855.000 

2.4. Compatibility with the financial programming and the financial perspective 
x Proposal compatible with the existing financial programming 

. This proposal will entail reprogramming of the relevant heading in the 
financial perspective. 
. This may entail application of the provisions of the Interinstitutional 
Agreement. 
2.5 Financial impact on revenue 
. No financial implications (involves technical aspects regarding implementation 
of a measure) 
OR 
x Financial impact – the effect on revenue is as follows: 
Certain Associated States will contribute to the funding of the Specific Programme. 
The association agreements are linked to a Framework Programme. Their renewal 
will be renegotiated following adoption of the new Framework Programme and it is 
therefore impossible to forecast the amount of revenue in question. 

In accordance with Article 27 of the Financial Regulation, certain revenue may be 
reused. 

3. BUDGET CHARACTERISTICS 
Type of expenditure New EFTA 
participation 
Participation 
applicant 
countries 
Heading 
Financial 
Perspective 
Comp/ 
Non-comp 
Diff/Nondiff 
YES/NO YES/NO YES/NO No 3 

70



4. LEGAL BASIS 
Article 166 of the EC Treaty. 

Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council adopting the 
framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research, 
technological development and demonstration activities aimed at contributing 
towards the creation of the European Research Area. 

5. DESCRIPTION AND GROUNDS 
5.1. Need for Community intervention 
5.1.1 Objectives pursued 
As recognised at the highest political level by the European Council in Lisbon, Feira, Nice 
and again recently in Stockholm, research is a central component of the knowledge-based 
economy and society developing worldwide. The objective set for the EU in Lisbon was "to 
become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable 
of sustainable economic growth, more and better jobs and greater social cohesion" over the 
next decade. More than ever, research is proving to be one of the main driving forces for 
economic and social progress, a key factor in business competitiveness, employment and the 
quality of life. In addition, science and technology are key elements in the policy-making 
process at both EU and national level. 

However, Europe still has structural weaknesses where research is concerned. These can be 
summedup infour main points: 

I. Insufficient and dispersed investment in research and technological development and 
more generally in knowledge (RTD, education and software), with the result that we 
are lagging behind our competitors. In 1999, the EU invested EUR 76 billion less 
than the US in research and development. It is now lagging behind its competitors in 
terms of research spending as a proportion of GDP (in 1999, the figure was 1.9% for 
the EU compared with 2.6% for the US and 2.9% for Japan28). In 1999, the US 
invested some 9% in knowledge, ahead of the EU (7.6%) and Japan (6.9%). And the 
gap is continuingtowiden. 
II. Insufficient human resources in research. Researchers represent 5.3/1000 of the 
workforce in the EU (1998), 7.4/1000 in the US (1993) and 8.9/1000 in Japan (1998) 
where there are twice as many researchers in industry. Direct public spending on 
higher education corresponds to 0.9% of GDP in the EU, 1.4% in the US and 0.5% in 
Japan (1997) 
III. A limited capacity to translate scientific breakthroughs into innovative and 
competitive products and services, despite high-quality scientific production. The 
figures for the number of patents granted by the European, American and Japanese 
patents offices per million inhabitants are 32 in the EU, 49 in the US and 88 in Japan. 
In 1998, the trade balance for high-tech products was a €28 billion deficit for the EU 
(a trend confirmed throughout the decade), compared with a €8 billion deficits for 
1998 figure. 

71



the US and an EUR 39 billion surplus for Japan. Risk capital investment in the 
advanced sectors corresponds to 80% in the US and, while it is on the increase, only 
26 % in the EU and 23% in Japan. 

IV. A fragmentation of research policies in Europe. The EU has not yet adopted a 
fully-fledged research policy. The 15 national policies co-exist side by side and 
alongside the Community framework programme without adequate coordination 
between them to achieve efficient organisation and exploitation. This lack of 
coordination also affects the establishment and efficient exploitation of research 
infrastructures. 
To alleviate this situation, the Commission has proposed and Council and Parliament have 
endorsed the creation of a "European Research Area". Bringing it about will necessarily be 
the product of a joint effort by the Community, the Member States and research stakeholders. 
The Community research framework programmes (2002-2006) and the specific programmes 
will make a contribution to this in particular through the significant leverage effect that they 
can have for integrating, coordinating and structuring research in the EU and strengthening 
the foundations of the European Research Area. 

A structural change in the EU's S&T fabric to remedy the above mentioned weaknesses will 
need resources commensurate with the objective. The Commission has proposed funding for 
the framework programme totalling EUR 17.5 billion, corresponding to the previous level of 
funding plus inflation and growth (but still representing only 5 to 6% of public spending on 
RTD). The Commission takes the view that this sort of amount could have a significant effect 
on the research system as such, improve at least some of the overall research indicators, and 
have a significant effect in the priority areas of the framework programme which will 
generate growth in the EU. In overall terms, this level of funding will make it possible to 
maintain the Community's RTD effort expressed as percentage of GDP at its present level 
during the period 2003-2006. 

The plan is to implement the framework programmes by five specific programmes, three of 
which come under the European Community Treaty and two under the European Atomic 
Energy (Euratom) Treaty. Each specific programme is identified according to the nature of 
the instruments deployed, reflecting the objectives and organisation of the framework 
programme: 

– A programme on "Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area" 
comprising the indirect actions proposed under the heading "Focusing and 
Integrating research" and under the heading "Strengthening the foundations of the 
European Research Area", thus bring together research and coordination activities. 
– A programme on "Structuring the European Research Area", comprising horizontal, 
support and structuring activities. 
– Two "Joint Research Centre (JRC)" programmes comprising the direct actions 
carried out by the JRC in the non-nuclear and nuclear fields respectively. 
– A "Nuclear energy" programme comprising the indirect actions carried out in the 
field of nuclear energy. 
There is a clear correspondence between the first two programmes and the four activities 
mentioned in Article 164 of the EC Treaty. The amounts deemed necessary for these two 

72



specific programmes reflect the correspondence in Annex II to the framework programme 
proposal, on the one hand the respective shares of the various activities, and on the other the 
indicative breakdown of the maximum overall amount between the blocks and categories of 
activities. 

The need for coherent utilisation of the three new instruments for the integration of research 
activities in Europe together with specific targeted research projects and co-ordination 
actions, makes it necessary to implement the actions proposed in the various priority thematic 
areas by means of a single specific programme. Similarly, carrying out a substantial 
proportion of the international cooperation activities in the form of opening up networks and 
projects to participation of third country researchers and organisations makes it necessary to 
integrate activities in this area and the research activities in a single programme. 

Lastly, the particular character of JRC activities, as well as the need to ensure that it has 
sufficient budgetary autonomy, justify a separate specific programme in the EC field and in 
the Euratom field. 

The objectives of the specific programme on "Integrating and strengthening the European 
Research Area" are set out below by action areas, together with their justification and the 
European added value that they can provide. 

1. FOCUSING AND INTEGRATING THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY RESEARCH AREA 
1.1. Priority thematic areas of research 
1.1.1.Genomics and biotechnologies for health 

The actions carried out in this area are intended to help Europe to exploit, by means 
of an integrated research effort, the results of breakthroughs achieved in decoding the 
genomes of living organisms, more particularly for the benefit of public health and 
citizens and to increase the competitiveness of the European biotechnology industry. 

The emphasis will be put on research aimed at bringing basic knowledge 
through to application, to enable real and consistent progress in medicine and 
improve quality of life. 

Justification and European added value 

– Need to develop the knowledge base, tools and resources necessary for 
exploiting the full potential of genome information that underpins applications, 
by integration of the research capacities across Europe to increase coherence 
and achieve critical mass. 
– Major breakthroughs are expected in the creation of new products, processes, 
services as regards health care and medicine in the field of postgenomics 
research 
– There is a global emergency caused by the 3 major communicable diseases 
(HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis) that make up 60 % of the total disease 
burden in developing countries. 
– Need to develop synergies between existing national activities to combat 
cancer in order to achieve critical mass and create added value. 
73



1.1.2.Information society technologies (IST) 

The actions carried out in this area, in line with the conclusions of the European 
Council in Lisbon and the objectives of the e-Europe initiative, are intended to 
stimulate the development in Europe of technologies and applications at the centre of 
the construction of the Information Society in order to increase the competitiveness 
of European industry and allow European citizens people in all EU regions the 
possibility of benefiting fully from the development of the knowledge-based society. 

Concentration on the future IST generation will bring IST applications and 
services to everyone and enable the development of more user-centred 
information technologies. 

Justification and European added value 

– Requirement for the development of Europe’s knowledge-based economy and 
society as agreed at the Lisbon Council. Europe has to increase its research 
effort in IST: Half of RTD in IST in OECD countries is concentrated in the US, 
25% in Japan and only 15% in Europe. 
– Public sector has a critical role in supporting high-risk and/or long term 
research in IST and in bringing together key actors in the field from industry 
and academia so as to further develop key technologies and their applications, 
to explore ground-breaking ideas and to improve efficiency and impact of 
research investment. 
– Community effort in RTD in IST provides a unique opportunity to aggregate 
the fragmented research effort of the Member States and to build solutions 
which are interoperable and implementable across the Member States. 
– Experience shows that only a sustained and appropriate research effort in IST 
can have the desired impact. In Europe, the effort of countries like Finland is a 
direct illustration of the benefit of RTD investment in IST. IST has been a 
research priority for more than 30 years and the relevant RTD investment is the 
highest as a percentage of GDP worldwide. 
– The IST sector now has an annual turnover of € 2000 billion worldwide and 
employs more than 12 m. persons in Europe. Europe’s role as an IST supplier 
is to be strengthened. The trade deficit of the EU in IST is of about 28 BEuro 
for an EU market of about 500 BEuro and the deficit is growing by 12 % a year 
despite Europe’s lead in mobile communications. 
– IST has become a motor for overall economic growth as a result both of its 
own expansion and its increasing integration in other sectors. Research in 
applied IST in businesses, for e-commerce and e-work, opens new market 
opportunities and provides substantial productivity gains and improves 
competitiveness of all industries. The life cycles of IST based products and 
services are quickening and shortening and technology adoption curves are 
faster, underlining the acceleration of technology change. 
– The emerging generation of IST will introduce a radical shift from the current 
'PC-based' systems and the 'keyboard, mouse and screen' towards ambient 
intelligence systems which will enable all citizens to benefit from IST services. 
74



– IST innovations provide powerful solutions to major societal challenges in 
healthcare, environment, learning, safety, mobility, and preservation of cultural 
heritage and employment. 
– Progress is needed in IST for the development of all other major research fields 
including biotechnologies, physics, energy, etc. 
1.1.3.Nanotechnologies intelligent materials and nanosciences, knowledge-based 
multifunctional materials, and new production processes and devices 

The actions carried out in this area are intended to help Europe achieve the critical 
mass of capacities needed to develop and exploit, in particular for eco-efficiency and 
reduction of discharges of hazardous substances into the environment, leading 
edge technologies for the knowledge and intelligence-based products, services and 
manufacturing processes over the years to come. 

Justification and European added value 

– Need to maintain a strong position for Europe in these emerging markets 
– Medium-term market for nanomaterials estimated at over €6 billion (medical 
equipment sector) and intelligent materials market estimated at several 
hundreds of billions of euros. 
– Impact of intelligent knowledge-based multifunctional materials on the 
development of industrial technologies and systems and indirectly on sectors 
such as energy, medicine, electronics, transport or construction. 
– Importance of the manufacturing sector in Europe: 40 million jobs and €4,000 
billion. 
– Investments to be stepped up in the field of new production processes (at 
present some €1000 per capita compared with € 2000 per capita in the US). 
1.1.4.Aeronautics and space 

The aim of the actions carried out in this area is twofold: to consolidate, by 
integrating its research efforts, the position of the European aerospace aeronautics 
and space industry vis-à-vis increasingly strong world competition; and to help 
exploit the potential of European research in this sector with a view to improving 
safety and environmental protection. 

Justification and European added value 

– Scale of investments needed (US investment in RTD three to six times higher 
depending on the sectors). 
– Foreseeable needs concerning air transport on a world scale: some 
14,000 aircraft in the next 15 years (market worth €1000 billion). Increase in 
air traffic of around 5% per annum for the next few decades or a doubling in 
the next 20 years. 
75



– Importance of the satellite related markets (world annual turnover for satellites 
and launchers estimated at €40 billion). 
– Support for the "single European sky" policy. 
1.1.5.Food safety and health risks quality and safety 

The actions carried out in this area are intended to help establish the integrated 
scientific and technological bases needed to develop an environmentally friendly 
system of production and distribution of safe and healthy food, in line with 
consumer requirements, and control of food-related risks, relying in particular on 
biotechnology tools, as well as health risks associated with environmental changes. 

Justification and European added value 

– Recent food scares have highlighted the multi-factorial and trans-border nature 
of the issues at stake 
– The development of powerful and validated risk assessment methods requires 
the pooling of a wide range of expertise 
– The agri-food industry is a very large job provider in Europe with more than 10 
million employees 
– Environmental factors contributing significantly to increasing incidence of 
cancer, allergy, asthma 
– Increased consumer demand regarding traceability of food products 
1.1.6.Sustainable development, and global change and ecosystems 

The activities carried out in this area are intended to strengthen the scientific and 
technological capacities needed for Europe to be able to implement sustainable 
development, recognized as a Community objective by the Göteborg European 
Council, integrating its environmental, economic and social dimensions, with 
particular regard to secure sustainable energy and transport. These activities 
should and make a significant contribution to the international effort to understand 
and control global change and preserve the equilibrium of ecosystems. 

1.1.6.1. Technologies for Sustainable Energy Systems development 
Justification and European added value 

– Uncertainties, interruptions of, or reductions in, energy supply, and even 
instability of energy prices, may have a severe negative impact on society and 
the economy. 
– The probability of major climate change is strongly enhanced by the high and 
increasing level of CO2 emissions related to energy supply and use 
– The EU's dependence on energy imports is already 50% and expected to rise 
over the coming years (if no action is taken), reaching 70% by 2020 
76



– Renewable energy technologies typically have relatively higher costs than 
established fossil fuel based technologies 
1.1.6.2 Sustainable surface transport 
Justification and European added value 

– 97% of freight and 95% of passengers use surface transport in Europe 
contributing on one side to the economic prosperity of Europe but at the 
same time: 
– affecting the environment by producing noxious emissions, spillage 
of toxic products, creating noise nuisance and being responsible for 
24% of CO2 emissions 
– causing 40 000 fatal accidents and several hundred thousand serious 
injuries 
– around 10 million people are directly employed by the surface transport 
sector 
– surface transport-related congestion (costing about 0.5% of EU GNP), 
safety and environmental issues have a strong impact on sustainable 
development requiring actions at European level with a co-ordinated and 
integrated approach. 
1.1.6.3 Global change and ecosystems 
Justification and European added value 

– Requirement for the faster development of Europe’s capacity to predict, control 
and adapt to global change in order to maintain and improve the EU citizens’ 
quality of life and contribute to the International Conventions (Kyoto and 
Montreal protocols), as well as for the preservation of ecosystems and the 
protection of biodiversity. 
– The sustainable development concept needs to be integrated in the EU policies, 
in particular energy, transport, environment and enterprise. 
– The estimated downward trend in ozone over Europe is of 7 % per decade and 
followed by an increasing trend of UV radiation. 
– Climate change has an impact on natural resources in particular on water 
availability and quality, and on biodiversity and ecosystems. 
– There will be an increased warming in the future with different not yet known 
impacts on Europe and its regions. 
– Strategies for the sustainable use of land and marine resources, including 
agricultural and forest resources, are needed for the sustainable 
development of Europe especially considering global change issues. 
77



– The annual budget for this research area is estimated at € 2 billion world-wide 
and € 500 m at European level (FP 20% of the total EU contribution). 
1.1.7.Citizens and governance in a the European knowledge-based society 

The actions carried out in this area are intended to mobilise in a coherent effort, in all 
their wealth and diversity, European research capacities in economic, political, social 
and human sciences with a view that are necessary to develop an understanding of 
and to address issues related to the emergence of the knowledge-based society and 
new forms of relationships between people on one hand and people and citizens 
and institutions on the other. 

Justification and European added value 

– The need to understand the issues and options involved in the objective for the 
European Union “to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledgebased economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth with 
more and better jobs and greater social cohesion”, by building a European 
knowledge society 
– The need to understand and have an informed discussion on the issues and 
options involved in the development and evolution of new forms of governance 
in an enlarging Europe and its implications for European citizens; 
1.2. Anticipating the EU’s scienctific and technological needs Specific activities 
covering a wider field of research 
1.2.1.Policy orientated research and leading edge topics Supporting policies and 
anticipating scientific and technological needs 

The aim is to develop research activities in support of other Community policies, on 
the one hand, and, on the other hand, to be able to launch research activities rapidly 
as unforeseeable scientific and technological needs appear. 

Justification and European added value 

– Need to develop research activities in support of other Community policies. 
This need has been confirmed by all the Commission services which 
implement Community policies. 
– Need to be able launch rapidly research activities as unforeseeable scientific 
and technological needs appear. The rapid emergence of unforeseen needs such 
as, in the past, those connected with BSE, for example, have demonstrated the 
importance of this. 
1.2.2.Specific Horizontal research activities involving for SMEs 

Carried out in support of European competitiveness and enterprise and innovation 
policy, the specific activities for SMEs are intended to help European SMEs in 
traditional or new areas to boost their technological capacities and develop their 
ability to operate on a European and international scale. 

Justification and European added value 

78



– SMEs account for 99.8% of European businesses, 66% of jobs and 55% of the 
EU's private sector turnover. 
– It is estimated that SMEs contribute nearly 50% to the competitiveness of 
bigger businesses as suppliers or subcontractors. 
– High-tech SMEs are making a growing contribution to research in sectors such 
as IT, multimedia and biotechnology. 
– The framework programme for research and technological development (RDT) 
is an important instrument: over the last 5 years (1994-1999), over 20 000 
European SMEs benefited from this opportunity and, according to a 
satisfaction survey, nearly 96% of them are satisfied with their choice. 
1.2.3.Specific measures in support of international cooperation activities 

The general objective of the international cooperation activities carried out under the 
Framework Programme is to help open up the European Research Area to the world. 

Specific activities will concern three groups of countries: the Mediterranean and 
Balkan third countries, Russia and the States of the CIS, and the developing 
countries. 

Justification and European added value 

– Certain global issues (climate change, biodiversity, etc.) can only be addressed 
in partnership with third countries. 
– Europe envisages privileged relations with certain groups of countries (NIS, 
Mediterranean countries, etc.). Scientific partnerships with those countries will 
facilitate the establishment and strengthening of these relations. 
– Certain countries (developing countries, for example) are faced with specific 
problems necessitating coordinated action. 
– The expertise and knowledge existing in the world is of interest to European 
researchers which should have access to them. 
2. STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA 
2.1. Support for the coordination of research activities 
The objective is to encourage and support initiatives undertaken by several countries, 
in areas of common strategic interest (such as health, biotechnology, environment, 
energy) and to develop synergy between their existing activities through 
coordination of their implementation. 

It is also to enhance the complementarity and synergy between Community actions 
undertaken under the Framework Programme and those of other European scientific 
co-operation organisations as well as among these organisations themselves. 

Justification and European added value 

79



– Avoid duplication and fragmentation of effort 
– Reduce gaps between the most advanced and less advanced regions. 
– Exploit the efforts already made with a view to collaboration between Member 
States. 
2.2. Support for the coherent development of research and innovation policies 
The objective of the activities carried out in this area is to promote the coherent 
development of research and innovation policies in Europe through the early 
identification of challenges and areas of common interest as well as by supplying 
national and Community policy makers with knowledge and decision-aid tools that 
can help them formulate these policies. 

Justification and European added value 

– Need to use more systematically foresight results, in order to strengthen the 
ability to anticipate S&T-related issues at stake for Europe, to develop shared 
views on such issues, and more generally to create a strategic basis for 
European S&T policy 
– Necessity to respond to the reinforced demand from S&T policy makers for a 
common base of relevant and comparable indicators 
– Need for a strategic tool to improve the quality and efficiency of research 
policies: benchmarking national policies 
– Respond to the need for research players and users to be able to locate specific 
expertise easily in the context of their activities. 
5.1.2 Measures taken in connection with ex ante evaluation 
An ex-ante evaluation was carried out by the Commission services when preparing the 
specific programme proposals. Its results reflect in particular: 

– the recommendations of the five-year assessment of the framework programmes and 
specific programmes carried out by independent experts in the course of the 
year 2000; 
– the Commission's mid-term review of the fifth framework programme (1998-2002) 
presented in COM(2000)612 of 4 October 2000 and detailed in Commission staff 
paper SEC(2000)1780 of 23 October 2000; 
– wide-ranging consultations among the protagonists relating to the two 
communications on the European Research Area in the course of the year 200029 
and the framework programme proposal at the beginning of 2001; 
– a series of internal and external Commission studies relating to economic, political 
and foresight areas and the impact of RTD activities. 
COM (2000) 6 of 18 January 2000
COM (2000) 612 of 4 October 2000


80



The results of the ex-ante evaluation carried out are reflected in particular in the choices made 
with regard to the structure of the programmes, the objectives and priorities and the 
implementing instruments. 

The objectives and priorities were selected in accordance with the rigorous application of the 
criterion of European added value. 

This covers the following aspects applied to the priority themes and activities selected, the 
justification and European added value of which are described in greater detail in point 5.1. 
and the expected results in point 5.2. 

– Cost and scale of research beyond the possibilities of a single country, and need to 
assemble a critical mass of financial and human resources (e.g. genomics, 
nanotechnologies, aeronautics); 
– Economic interest of collaboration (economies of scale) and as a result of its 
beneficial effects on the private research effort and industrial competitiveness (e.g. 
information society technologies, nanotechnologies, intelligent materials, new 
production processes, aeronautics and space and specific research activities for 
SMEs); 
– Maintenance or development of the EU's position in RTD areas strategic for the EU 
(e.g. maintaining the strong position in aeronautics and mobile phones and 
developing the, at present, relatively low potential in solar photovoltaic energy) ; 
– Need to combine complementary expertise present in different countries, more 
particularly to deal with interdisciplinary problems (e.g. food safety and health risks, 
sustainable development and global change, support for the coordination of research 
and innovation activities and coherent development of research policies); 
– Links with the priorities and interests of the EU as well as with Community 
legislation and policies (e.g. aeronautics and space, food safety and health risks, 
sustainable development and global change, citizens and governance in the European 
knowledge-based society, international cooperation, anticipating the EU's S&T 
needs); 
– Necessarily transnational nature of the research by virtue of the scale at which 
problems occur or for scientific reasons (e.g. food safety and health risks, sustainable 
development and global change, citizens and governance in the European 
knowledge-based society, international cooperation, support for the coordination of 
research and innovation activities; coherent development of research policies); 
With regard to the implementing instruments, further to the specific targeted research 
projects and the co-ordination actions, three main new instruments, which by their nature 
can only be implemented at Community level, have been designed as an overall priority to 
contribute to the establishment of: 

– a critical mass needed and the integration of research 
– closer links between the programmes and Member States' activities and coordination 
of national programmes 
81



– cooperation in areas strategic for the EU and solutions to major challenges facing the 
EU 
– the excellence and attractiveness of S&T in Europe 
– dissemination and exploitation of S&T results throughout the EU. 
To ensure the impact of Community efforts in the seven priority thematic areas of the 
Framework Programme, these three instruments will be the only ones employed in these 
areas, networks of excellence and integrated projects will be used from the start of the 
Sixth Framework Programme in each theme and, where deemed appropriate, as a 
priority means, while maintaining the use of specific targeted projects and coordination 
actions. 

The instruments are: 

a) networks of excellence 

The purpose of this instrument is to strengthen and develop European scientific and 
technological excellence by means of the integration, at European level, of research 
capacities existing or emerging at both national and regional level. Each network will also 
aim at advancing knowledge in a particular area by assembling a critical mass of 
expertise. Generally targeted towards long-term objectives, the activities concerned, often 
multidisciplinary, are not aimed at precise predefined results in terms of products, processes 
or services. A Network of excellence will be implemented by a joint programme of 
activities involving some, or, where appropriate, all of the research capacities and 
activities of the participants in the relevant area to attain a critical mass of expertise and 
European added value. A joint programme of activities could aim at the creation of a 
self-standing virtual centre of excellence that may result in developing the necessary 
means for achieving a durable integration of the research capacities. 

b) Integrated projects 

Integrated Projects are designed to give increased impetus to the Community’s 
competitiveness or to address major societal needs by mobilising a critical mass of 
research and technological development resources and competences. Each Integrated 
Project should be assigned clearly defined scientific and technological objectives and 
should be directed at obtaining specific results applicable in terms of, for instance, 
products, processes or services. Under these objectives they may include more long-term 
or “risky” research. All the activities carried out in the context of an integrated project will 
fit into the general framework of an “implementation plan”. 

c) Participation in national programmes carried out jointly (under Article 169 of the 
Treaty) 

The objective of this instrument is to promote and support the coherent and coordinated 
mobilisation for the benefit of the entire EU of the organised efforts (programmes) of the 
Member States in areas of common and priority interest to the Union. The aim is also to 
increase the impact of national efforts on an EU scale in matters of interest to many 
Member States. The national programmes in the priority research areas of the Framework 
Programme in question will be those carried out either by governments, regional authorities or 
national research organisations. Their joint implementation will entail the drawing up of 

82



harmonised work programmes, the coordination of the assignment of budgets; a redirection of 
certain actions to increase complementarity, and the launching of joint calls for proposals. 

This instrument has never been used before as it presupposes a desire for mutual coordination 
between Member States and will require a more substantial preparation phase compared with 
more conventional projects. Nevertheless, the time is judged to be right -in particular 
following the Lisbon summit and the call for the open coordination method -for this type of 
instrument. 

5.1.3 Measures taken following ex post evaluation 
The recommendations of the five-year assessment of the framework programmes and the 
specific programmes carried out in 2000 have been taken into account in preparing the 
specific programme proposals, in particular those concerning: 

– the need to make up for Europe's trailing position in the field of RTD compared with 
its competitors; 
– the need for complementarity and coherence between national and Community RTD 
policies and the essential role of the Commission in achieving this objective; 
– the beneficial impact of the framework programme which "fills a gap in Europe by 
enabling researchers in universities and in industry to carry out applied work 
together"; 
– the need to lighten the procedures of the 1998-2002 programme and the need to 
"rethink the structures and procedures for managing the framework programme"; 
– placing Community research activities in the broader context of a genuine European 
research policy; 
– reinforcing the concentration of the programmes; 
– continuing with the research needed to achieve the objectives of Community 
policies; 
– the desired move towards an adapted range of instruments that are more flexible, 
taking account of all the possibilities offered by the Treaty. 
In addition, the mid-term review of the fifth framework programme has resulted in particular 
in adjustments to the annual work programmes for the specific programmes, aimed at 
concentrating efforts to a greater extent and launching pilot projects for the measures 
envisaged for the next framework programme (networks, clusters, industrial platforms, 
larger-scale projects, etc.). 

5.2. Actions envisaged and means of budget intervention 
The actions envisaged for the specific programme on "Integrating and strengthening the 
European Research Area" are set out below presented by detailed action areas. This 
presentation makes it possible to highlight the estimated results expected, the contributions to 
the overall objectives of the framework programme or of the Community or potential 
performance parameters associated with these. These indications are intended as yardsticks 
and not definitively adopted goals. 

83



A correspondence between the action areas and the types of instruments used is given further 
on in the form of a table. 

1. FOCUSING AND INTEGRATING THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY RESEARCH AREA 
1.1. Priority thematic areas of research 
1.1.1.Genomics and biotechnology for health 

i) Advanced genomics and its applications for health 
fundamental knowledge and basic tools for functional genomics in all organisms 

(Gene expression and proteomics, Structural genomics, Comparative genomics and 
population genetics, Bioinformatics, Multidisciplinary functional genomics 
approaches to basic biological processes) 

applications of knowledge and technologies in the field of genomics and 
biotechnology for health 

(Technological platforms for the development of new diagnostic, prevention and 
therapeutic tools,) 

ii) Combating major diseases 

applications-oriented genomic approaches to medical knowledge and technologies 
and technologies in public health 

(Combating cancer, cardiovascular disease Combating, cardiovascular disease, 
diabetes and rare diseases, Combating resistance to antibiotics and other drugs, 
Studying the brain and combating degenerative diseases of the nervous system, 
Studying human development and the ageing process) 

Combating cancer 

confronting the major communicable diseases linked to poverty 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– To increase the quality and performance of tools needed to exploit genome 
information (high throughput tools, suitable model organisms, and 
bioinformatics). 
– To acquire more information on genes related to health or disease. 
– To contribute to health care costs reduction through more precise diagnosis and 
better-targeted treatment. 
– To target the reduction of cost and time for the development of new drugs 
(from bench to the market). 
– To foster the competitiveness of Europe’s biotechnology industry. 
84



– To develop new in vitro tests as alternatives to animal experimentation. 
– To increase the number of new effective vaccines and new therapies, in 
particular against infections acquired in hospital. 
– To develop patient-orientated strategies for research from prevention to 
diagnosis and treatment, in particular for combating cancer. 
– To increase public and private investment in health research for developing 
countries. 
– To increase number of partnerships between Europe and developing countries 
1.1.2.Information Society technologies 
i) Applied IST research addressing major societal and economic challenges 

(Research on Technologies for trust and confidence security, Research addressing 
societal challenges, Research addressing work and business challenges, Complex 
problem solving in science, engineering, business and for society) 

ii) Communication and computing infrastructures and software technologies 

(Communication and network technologies, Software technologies, services 
embedded systems and distributed systems) 

iii) Components and microsystems 

(Micro, Nano and Opto-electronics, Micro and Nano Technologies, Microsystems, 
Displays) 

iv) Knowledge and interface technologies 

(Knowledge technologies and digital content, Intelligent surfaces and interfaces) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– Strengthened and reinforced European leadership in IST. Reinforcement of 
Europe’s successes in areas such as mobile communications, networks 
infrastructure, consumer electronics, microelectronics and embedded software. 
Indicators: Macroeconomic indicators on the supply of IST and IST share in 
GDP are appropriate evaluation measures. 
– Next generation of terrestrial and satellite-based mobile and wireless systems, 
beyond 3G in Europe and integration of networks infrastructures around the 
next generation Internet. Indicators: Market share, technology adoption rate 
surveys. 
– Electronic and mobile commerce solutions for anytime-anywhere trading and 
covering the whole value creation cycle of extended products and services. 
Indicators: Sectoral output data, including the service sector. 
85



– Improved security of electronic transactions, enhancing privacy of IST 
applications and services and providing tools combating cyber crimes. 
Indicators: White-collar crime statistics. 
– Broader inclusion of citizens in the Information Society, and more effective 
health, safety, mobility and environment management and support systems; 
Conception of assistive systems that will restore functions or compensate for 
disabilities. Indicators: User survey satisfaction ratings (e.g. on improvement in 
diagnostics), health and safety statistics. 
– Solutions enabling citizens to learn when needed, at any time, wherever they 
wish and in the most suitable way. Development of solutions for eliciting, 
sharing, trading and delivery of organisational knowledge. Indicators: User 
surveys, questionnaires. 
1.1.3.Nanotechnologies and nanosciences, knowledge-based multifunctional 
multifunctional materials, and new production processes and devices 

i) nanotechnologies and nanosciences 

(Long-term interdisciplinary research into understanding phenomena, harnessing 
mastering processes and developing research tools, Nanobiotechnologies, 
Nanometre-scale engineering techniques to create materials and components, 
Development of handling and control devices and instruments, Applications in areas 
such as health, chemistry, energy, optics and the environment) 

ii) Knowledge-based Multifunctional intelligent materials 

(Development of fundamental knowledge, Technologies associated with the 
production and transformation of new and processing of knowledge-based 
multifunctional materials, and biomaterials, Engineering support for materials 
development) 

iii) new production processes and devices 

(Development of new processes and flexible and intelligent manufacturing systems, 
Systems research hazard control, Optimising the life-cycle of industrial systems, 
products and services) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– To increase human and financial resources devoted to research in the private 
sector by the achievement of critical mass in this industrially oriented field. 
– To increase the development and uptake of nanotechnologies, intelligent 
materials and new products processes in SMEs through their significant (> 
20%) participation in these activities. 
– To minimise natural resource use emissions and waste within a product lifecycle approach 
86



– To increase and integrate skills and competence across S&T disciplines and 
actors, including in the Candidate Countries 
1.1.4.Aeronautics and space 
i) aeronautics 

(Strengthening increasing competitiveness, improving environmental impact with 
regard to engine emissions and noise, increasing aircraft safety, increasing the 
capacity and safety of the air transport system) 

ii) space 

(Galileo, GMES, Satellite telecommunications) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– Maintain European leadership in aeronautics. 
– Reduce aircraft direct operating costs by 20% and 50%, in the short and long 
term, respectively. 
– Reduce by a factor of 2 the accident rates in the short term and by a factor of 5 
in the long term 
– Develop the capability of handling 16 million flights a year in 10 years. 
1.1.5.Food quality and safety and health risks 

Epidemiology of food-related diseases and genetic susceptibilities allergies, 
including the impact of diet on the health of children 

Environmental health risks linked to the food chain 

Impact of food, for instance new products, products resulting from organic 
farming, (in particular products containing GMOs) functional food, and in 
particular products containing genetically modified organisms, and those arising 
from recent biotechnology developments, on health 

«Traceability» processes all along the production food chain, (for instance relating 
to genetically modified organisms including those based on recent biotechnology 
developments) 

Methods of analysis, and detection and control of chemical contaminants and 
pathogenic microorganisms (viruses, bacteria, parasites, and new agents of the prion 
type) 

Safer and environmentally friendly product methods and healthier, foodstuffs and 
animal feed (including those based on biotechnologies and on organic farming 
processes) 

Impact of animal feed, including products containing GMOs and the use of subproducts of different origins for that feed, on human health 

87



Environmental health risks linked to the food chain (chemical, biological and 
physical) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– To define validated biomarkers of exposure or effects in relation to human 
health 
– To increase the number of control analyses carried out in the food chain 
– To increase the number of food crops and food animal strains/breeds 
– To increase the number of safer production technologies 
– To reduce total bacterial load in commercialised food products 
1.1.6 Sustainable development, and global change and ecosystems 
1.1.6.1.Technologies for Sustainable development Energy Systems 
i) research activities having an impact in the short and medium term 
(Renewable energy sources, more efficient and clean use of energy, especially in 
urban areas, new concepts of energy efficient and cleaner transport, Intelligent 
transport, re-balancing and integration of transport modes) (Clean energy, in 
particular renewable energy sources and their integration in the energy system, 
energy savings and energy efficiency, alternative motor fuels) 

ii) research activities having an impact in the medium and longer term 

(Fuel cells, new technologies for energy carriers /transport and storage, in 
particular Hydrogen Solar photovoltaic technologies and biomass New and 
advance concepts in renewable energy technologies with a significant future 
energy potential, Capture and sequestration of CO2) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– To contribute to the political objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 
levels of 8% lower than those of 1990 by 2010, and keeping the effort to 
sustain this trend beyond 2010 (Kyoto Protocol) 
– To contribute to the doubling of the share (from 6% to 12%) of RES by 2010 
(White Paper on Renewable Energy); 12% energy savings through rational use 
and demand reduction by 2010; reversing the trend towards an increase (from 
50% to 70%) in the dependence on foreign energy supply. 
– To contribute to the reduction in the longer term of new and renewable Energy 
costs to levels competitive with fossil fuel based sources 
88



1.1.6.2 Sustainable surface transport 
i) Developing environmentally friendly transport systems and means of 
transport for passengers and freight and clean urban transport 

(New technologies and concepts for all surface transport modes, advanced 
design and production techniques) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– to reduce the contribution of surface transport (rail, road, waterborne; 
passengers and freight) to CO2 production and other emissions including 
noise 
– to increase safety, comfort, quality, cost-effectiveness and energy

efficiency of vehicles and vessels. 

ii) Making rail and maritime transport more effective and more competitive, 
addressing the interoperability of transport modes 

(Rebalancing and integrating different transport modes, to make rail, maritime 
and intermodal transport more effective, Increasing road, rail and maritime 
safety and avoiding traffic congestion) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– to assure intelligent and safe transport of passengers and freight 
– to constrain the rise in transport demand 
– to re-orientate transport modes to make rail, maritime and intermodal 
transport more effective 
– to increase road, rail and maritime safety 
– to avoid traffic congestion 
1.1.6.3. Global change and ecosystems 
Impact and mechanisms of greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric pollutants on 
climate, ozone depletion and carbon sinks (oceans, forests and soil) 
Water cycle including soil-related aspects 
Biodiversity, protection of genetic resources, functioning of terrestrial and marine 

ecosystems and interactions between human activities and the latter 
Mechanisms of desertification and natural disasters connected with climate change 
Strategies for sustainable land management including coastal zones, agricultural 

lands and forests. 

89



Operational forecasting and modelling, including global climate change 
observation systems for climate change 

Operational forecasting and modelling 

Complementary research (development of advanced methods for risk assessment 
and environmental quality) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– To develop instruments to predict regional climatic change. 
– To develop management tools to mitigate the impacts on water availability and 
on soil quality. 
– To enhance european scientific contributions to relevant Conventions and 
policy making and thereby increase the coherence of Europe’s research effort 
on the international scale. 
– To evaluate the indirect effects in climate by non-greenhouse gases. 
– To develop a network of biodiversity monitoring and to develop rehabilitation 
options. 
– To develop tools for the sustainable management of marine and terrestrial 
ecosystems. 
– To elucidate links between climatic change and natural disasters. 
– To develop instruments to better predict and mitigate the consequences of 
natural disasters (floods, storms, fires, avalanches, and landslides). 
– To develop strategies for the sustainable management of forest and 
agricultural resources. 
– To develop common European data bases on global change parameters. 
– To improve forecasting of the state of the marine, terrestrial and 
atmospheric environments. 
1.1.7.Citizens and governance in a the European knowledge-based society 
i) Knowledge-based European Society and social cohesion 

(Improving the generation, distribution and use of knowledge and its impact on 
economic and social development, Options and choices for the development of a 
knowledge-based society serving the EU objectives set at the Lisbon summit and 
subsequent European Councils, The variety of paths towards a knowledge society) 

ii) citizenship, democracy and new forms of governments 

(The implications of European integration and enlargement for governance and the 
citizen, Articulation of areas of responsibility and new forms of governance, Conflict 

90



resolution, security, peace and justice, New forms of citizenship and cultural 
identities) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– To have available comparative studies, including data collection and 
development of methodologies, on the transition to the European knowledge 
society in the different areas of the economy and society 
1.2. Anticipating the EU’s scientific and technological needs Specific activities 
covering a wider field of research 
1.2.1. Policy-orientated research and leading edge topics Supporting policies and 
ancitipating scientific and technological needs 
Research needed for the formulation, implementation and monitoring of the 
application of Community policies. 

Research meeting needs in certain new interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary areas 
or at the leading edge of knowledge 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– Strengthened and more effective contribution to Community policies: the 
objectives and expected results for each policy concerned are to be defined by 
the respective Directorates General. 
– Reduction in response times and increased flexibility of action taken in the face 
of scientific, technological and socio-economic events. 
1.2.2.Specific Horizontal research activities involving for SMEs 

Collective research 

(Research aimed at addressing common problems/challenges; pre-normative 
research; research aimed at reinforcing the technological basis of particular sectors; 
development of technological tools) 

Cooperative research 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– Significant participation in the Specific Programme (over 15% of the funding 
for the part on “Integrating Research”) by SMEs, reflected in terms of an 
increase and training of R&D personnel, technological development and 
utilisation of results. 
– Participation indicators have been developed and were used to monitor the 
participation of SMEs in the Framework Programme (participation share in 
91



each thematic programme, participation for each country, newcomers, size, 
youth, female-owned…) 

1.2.3.Specific measures in support of international cooperation activities 

Helping European researchers, businesses and research organisations in the EU and 
the countries associated with the Framework Programme to have access to 
knowledge and expertise existing elsewhere in the world. 

Helping to ensure Europe’s strong and coherent participation in research initiatives 
carried out at international level 

Providing support in the scientific and technological field to the implementation of 
the Community’s foreign policy and development aid policy. 

Specific activities concerning three groups of countries : the Mediterranean and 
Balkan third countries, Russia and the countries of the CIS, and the developing 
countries 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– Enlarged and strengthened participation of third countries in Community 
research activities 
– Intensified and higher-profile contribution to international actions aiming at 
resolving major global problems 
– Greater support in the field of science and technology for the implementation 
of foreign policy and development aid policy." 
2. STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA 
2.1. Support for coordination of research activities 
Coordination of national activities 

(Support proposals on co-ordination, networking, design and implementation of joint 
initiatives and develop an integrated information system in areassuch ashealth, 
biotechnology, environment and energy). 

Coordination at European level 

(S&T co-operation activities carried out in other European co-operation frameworks, 
Collaboration and joint initiatives of specialised European scientific co-operation 
organisations) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– Establish networks of national programmes 
– Evaluating the performances of the Member States and the observed 
differences with regard to innovation 
92



2.2. Support for the coherent development of research and innovation policies 
Analyses and studies (work related to foresight, statistics and scientific and 
technological indicators 

Benchmarking research and innovation policies at national, regional and European 
level 

Mapping scientific and technological excellence in Europe 

Improving the regulatory and administrative environment for research and 
innovation in Europe 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters 

– Better informed decision-making regarding the prioritisation and 
implementation of EU S&T and other policies. 
– High level of participation of S&T decision makers and policy institutes in 
foresight-based EU decision support activities. 
– Publication of an annual report on European science and technology, including 
key figures on the European Research Area. 
– Studies on developing new and improved indicators in fields of policy interest, 
and of new statistical databases. 
– Making available the results of the first benchmarking cycle 
– Realising the first excellence maps. 
93



The means of intervention and financial participation under the framework programme will be 
as follows, according to the objectives: 

Areas Activities/objectives of the instrument Types of instruments(1) Financial participation under 
the Framework Programme 
Focusing and 
Integrating 
European 
research 
In the priority thematic areas of research 
Genomics and biotechnology for health ; 
Information Society technologies ; 
Nanotechnologies and nanosciences, 
knowledge-based multifunctional intelligent 
materials,and new production processes and 
devices; 
Aeronautics and space ; 
Food quality and safety and health risks; 
Sustainable development, and global change 
and ecosystems ; 
Citizens and governance in the European a 
knowledge-based society 
Networks of excellence 
Integrated projects 
In accordance with the 
research needs: 
Specific targeted projects 
Coordination and specific 
support actions 
Article 169 
Grant for integration 
Grant to the budget 
Grant to the budget 
Specific targeted research 
projects 
Grant to the budget 
Co-ordination actions Grant to the budget 
Anticipating the EU’s scientific and technological 
needs Specific activities covering a wider field of 
research : 
Specific targeted research 
projects 
Coordination and specific 
support actions 
Grant to the budget 
Grant to the budget : 
Supporting policies and anticipating 
scientific and technological needs of 
Community policies; 
New or emerging scientific and technological 
needs 
In duly justified cases : 
-Networks of excellence 
– Integrated projects 
–Article 169 
Grant for integration 
Grant to the budget 
Specific measures in support of international 
cooperation activities 
Specific research activities for SMEs 
Horizontal research activities involving 
SMEs 
-Specific targeted research 
projects 
-Coordination and specific 
support actions 
-Specific research projects for 
small and medium-sized 
enterprises 
Grant to the budget 
Grant to the budget 
Grant to the budget 
Grant to the budget 
Strengthening 
the foundations 
of the European 
Research Area 
Across the whole field of science and 
technology : 
Support for the coordination of research 
activities carried out in Europe 
Support for the coherent development of 
research and innovation policies in Europe 
-Coordination and specific 
support actions 

94



(1) Accompanying Specific support actions can also be implemented throughout the specific 
programme. 
The Community's budgetary intervention is aimed at businesses (and in particular SMEs), 
research centres, universities and national or European organisations, that fund research 
activities. The latter may also act as intermediaries for the Community's budgetary 
intervention. 

5.3. Means of implementation 
The Commission will ensure the implementation of the actions. In certain duly justified cases, 
it may call upon external bodies for assistance. 

6. FINANCIAL IMPACT 
6.1. Total financial impact on Part B -(over the entire programming period) 
For the record, the reference allocation for the Framework Programme of the 
European Community is EUR 16 275 16 270 million. The total amount for the 
Framework Programmes 2002-2006 is EUR 17 500 million. 

6.1.1 Financial intervention: Commitments in €milllion (to the third decimal place) 
Breakdown by objective Total 
1) Focusing and Integrating Community research 
12 055 
12 525 
Genomics and biotechnology for health 
2 000 
2200 
Advanced genomics and its applications for health 
1 150 
… 
Combating major diseases 
1 050 
… 
Information society technologies30 3 600 
Nanotechnologies and nanosciences, intelligent knowlegde-based 
multifunctional materials, and new production processes 
and devices 
1 300 
Aeronautics and space 
1 000 
1 075 
Food quality and safety andhealthrisks 
600 
685 
Sustainable development, and global change and ecosystems 
1 700 
2 120 

including up to 100 million for the further development of Géant and GRID 
95 


Sustainable energy systems 
810 
… 
Sustainable surface transport 
610 
… 
Global change and ecosystems 
700 
… 
Citizens and governance in a the European knowledge-based 
society 
225 
Anticipating the EU’s scientific and technological needs Specific activities 
covering a wider field of research 
1 630 
1 320 
Policy oriented research and leading edge topics Supporting policies 
and anticipating scientific and technological needs 
880 
570 
Specific Horizontal research activities for involving SMEs 
450 
Specific measures in support of international co-operation 
300 
2) Strengthening the foundations of the European Research Area 
450 
330 
Support for the coordination of activities 
400 
280 
Support for the coherent development of policies 50 
TOTAL 12 855 

An annual schedule for each of these objectives is not significant at this level. It 
could only be defined as being strictly proportional to that for the entire specific 
programme, itself in line with that of the framework programme. The annual internal 
breakdown will be established subsequently within the work programmes 
6.1.2 Technical and administrative assistance, support expenditure and IT expenditure 
(Commitment appropriations) 
This budget category does not apply in this field. 
6.2. Calculation of costs 
programming period) 
by measure envisaged in Part B (over the entire 

For the indirect actions of the Fifth Framework Programme of the European Community 
(1998-2002), the annual volume is in the order of 3500 new contracts signed (all categories 
confound), for an annual budget of € 3000 million. 

For the indirect actions of the Framework Programme 2002-2006, the annual budget will be 
in the order of € 3700 million, an increase in real terms by 13 %. 

Nevertheless, as set out in point 5.1.2, three new principal instruments have been designed for 
the implementation of this new Framework Programme, namely networks of excellence, 
integrated projects and participation to joint execution of national programmes (as provided 

96



for in Article 169 of the Treaty) that will apply within the thematic priority areas further 
to the specific targeted research projects and the co-ordination actions. 

Compared to previous Framework Programmes, the new instruments gobeyondmerely 
scientific projects and introduce the concept of integration of research, in particular by 
achiving critical mass of competences and resources in identified areas. 

As concerns the management of the Framework Programme 2002-2006, this concept of 
critical mass will be reflected in a significant increase of the mean financial contribution to 
projects and is expected to result in a substantial reduction of the number of contracts 
concluded annually. 

7. IMPACT ON STAFF AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE 
Determined to fundamentally modify the implementation of the Framework Programme, the 
Commission proposes to lower the ceiling for human resources and other administrative 
expenditure to 5.5 % for the two indirect, non-nuclear research programmes. 

Currently in the parts of the 5th Framework Programme related to indirect, non-nuclear 
research, the overall ceiling for human resources and other administrative expenditure is 
7.0%. 

On present trends, actual expenditure under the 5th Framework Programme is likely to remain 
close to this ceiling, perhaps a little below. 

Assuming there were to be no change in the methods of implementing the Framework 
Programme, and given the need to allow for some margin in this category of expenditure, the 
Commission would have no reason to depart from the overall ceiling of 7%. This is largely 
because the proposed budget for the next programme increases in line with inflation, allowing 
for a little more in line with growth in the economy. 

Any reduction in the overall ceiling could only be achieved on the assumption of significant 
gains in productivity, including significant changes in the management of the programme. A 
relatively restrictive set of assumptions would include : 

– A freeze on the total number of statutory staff at its 2002 level of 1654 posts, 
assuming productivity gains of 2% per annum to compensate for the increase in the 
real volume of the programme 
– An inflation rate of 2% a year, even though staff costs tend to rise at a slightly higher 
rate 
– A freeze in expenditure on external personnel at its 2002 level. 
The above scenario would allow the Commission to propose a reduction in the overall ceiling 
to about 6.3 %. 

The Commission is, however, prepared to commit itself to a much more significant reduction 
in the ceiling from 7.0% to 5.5%. This would allow an important amount of additional 
resources, roughly € 230 million, to be allocated directly to research projects. 

This requires equitable efforts in productivity gains in all research activities. The ceiling of 
5.5% proposed for administrative expenditure is a global one, covering the specific 
programmes “Integrating and Strengthening the European Research Area” and “Structuring 

97



the European Research Area” as a whole. In implementing these programmes, the 
Commission will ensure an appropriate share of administrative expenditure between the 
services responsible for managing research activities. This share will take account of the 
overall budget to be managed, the intensity of the use of the three new instruments, the 
labour-intensiveness and the latest technological developments of the activities at the various 
stages of their life-cycle, including their length, and the need to ensure effective management 
of the contracts committed under previous Framework Programmes. 

The main factor that would allow this to be achieved is the introduction on a widespread scale 
of the new instruments proposed in the next Framework Programme, namely integrated 
projects, networks of excellence and joint execution of national research programmes under 
Article 169 of the Treaty. These would allow net reductions in the costs of administering the 
programme. 

In other terms, a ceiling of 5.5 % expresses the determination of the Commission to 
fundamentally modify the implementation of the Framework Programme. 

– It is useful to recall that even if the new instruments are used fully in line with the 
Commission’s proposal, their impact on administrative expenditure will be gradual. 
During the 2003-2006 period, an important part of the administrative activities 
undertaken by the Commission will still be to implement and conclude previous 
Framework Programmes. 
The average duration of contracts for indirect research being four years, some 13,000 open 
contracts with a financial volume of € 6,600 million could be expected, at the start of 2003. 

The ceiling of 5.5 % for the human and administrative resources for indirect, non-nuclear 
programmes will therefore require exploiting all the potential of the new management 
approach to the Framework Programme: 

– Full use would need to be made of the new instruments to reduce the number of 
individual projects and contracts to be administered by the Commission. 
– Their management will need to be largely simplified and decentralised. 
– All possibilities will need to be exploited to externalise technical support activities 
and certain aspects of the management of specific categories of activities, whenever 
this reduces overall administrative expenditure. 
It requires also efficient programme and budget structures, and this reduced 5.5% ceiling 
should apply for the total of the two indirect, non-nuclear research programmes. 

This proposal is critically dependent on the introduction of the new instruments in line with 
the Commission’s proposal. Any revision of this will imply a change in the ceiling for 
administrative costs. 

Currently in the parts of the 5th Framework Programme related to indirect, nonnuclear research, the overall ceiling for human resources and other administrative 
expenditure is 7.0%. 

Assuming there were to be no change in the methods of implementing the Framework 
Programme, and given the need to allow for some margin in this category of 
expenditure, the Commission would have no reason to depart from this overall ceiling of 
7%. Given that the budget for the Sixth Framework Programme is 17% higher than the 

98



Fifth Framework Programme, this would have implied a net increase of around 250 
permanent posts on top of the 1654 posts allowed in 2002. 

The Commission is however committed to achieving significant gains in productivity in 
the implementation of the Sixth Framework Programme. This commitment will lead to 
an important reduction of the share linked to personnel and administration costs in 
relation to the previous framework programme. 

In the initial Commission proposal, this would have allowed administrative and 
personnel costs to be reduced to 5.5% of the programme budget, and statutory posts to 
be frozen at the 2002 levels. The main factor that would allow this to be achieved is the 
productivity gains arising from the introduction of the new instruments proposed in the 
next Framework Programme, namely integrated projects, networks of excellence and 
joint execution of national research programmes under Article 169 of the Treaty. In the 
Commission’s original proposal, these instruments would have been used exclusively in 
the implementation of the thematic priorities, which constitute the largest part of the 
framework programme. 

However, as a result of the Council Common Position on the framework programme, 
taking into account the amendments of the European Parliament, the use of the new 
instruments will not be exclusive. , In consequence, the instruments of the Fifth 
Framework programme will continue to be used alongside the new instruments to a 
greater extent than originally envisaged. These instruments generally involve small-scale 
contracts to be concluded directly with the Commission. The direct consequence of this 
decision is a much larger number of contracts to be managed by the Commission 
compared to the initial proposal. The exact number of additional projects to be managed 
cannot be known; on reasonable scenarios, it could be of the order of 25% to 33% 
higher than the original number envisaged. 

This substantial expected increase in the number of contracts to be managed represents 
effectively additional tasks for the Commission. In line with the Commission decision 
following the Peer Group exercise not to accept additional tasks if the corresponding 
resources are not available, an increase in the administrative and personnel resources of 
the framework programme is therefore required. 

In order to identify the potential sources for such additional resources, the Commission 
has examined various options: 

– redeployment of human resources: As part of the Peer group exercise, a detailed 
activity-by-activity review was carried out of the management of the 
Framework Programme. Significant economies were identified in the indirect 
non-nuclear research area (98 posts in DG Research representing around 10 % 
of statutory personnel). These economies have now been achieved through 
redeployment and other measures. There appears to be no scope for further 
redeployment in the short to medium term. 
– restructuring of the “tableau des effectifs” by converting C to A and B staff: The 
scope for this option was examined, however it cannot effectively be used, due to 
the fact that support staff in the research sector accounts for 26% of the total, 
which is well below the Commission average of 32%. Any further reduction in 
this percentage would cause difficulties in the management of research 
contracts. 
99



– vacancy rate: although the current vacancy rate of 8% is higher than the 
Commission average of 4%, it is accounted for by the circumstances applying to 
one specific category of staff, i.e. support staff in category C. It reflects 
historical structural difficulties in recruiting such staff to the research sector, 
where the possibilities have up to now been strictly limited. These difficulties 
are addressed in the Commission’s Communication of 27 December 2001 for 
the Reform of Research Personnel Policy and are expected to diminish in the 
medium-term bringing the average vacancy rate in the research sector down to 
the overall average of the Commission. 
– externalisation: the Commission initial proposal was based largely on the 
exclusive use of the new instruments, whose implementation implies the 
externalisation of a number of management tasks to the organisations actually 
participating in the projects. The Common Position of the Council on the Sixth 
Framework Programme reintroduces into the programme the old instruments, 
effectively requiring the Commission to “internalise” again some of these tasks. 
In addition to the externalisation implied by the use of the new instruments, the 
Commission is examining further externalisation of specific parts of the 
programme, but this assumption was already built into the initial proposal for 
5.5% of administrative costs. This matter will be reviewed after the Council 
regulation laying down the statute for executive agencies to be entrusted with 
certain tasks in the management of Community programmes31 comes into effect. 
The Commission has also examined the scope for further increases in productivity. 
Although the total number of contracts will increase significantly as compared with the 
original proposal, the Commission believes that, with increases in productivity and 
efficiency, the increase in staff resources required to manage these projects can be kept 
less than proportional to the increase in the workload. 

In conclusion, the initial 5.5% of administrative and personnel expenses needs to be 
increased to cover the additional tasks which the Commission has to carry out as a 
result of the Common Position. This increase will primarily cover 50 additional 
statutory posts (28A, 15 B, 7C) of a temporary nature. Reflecting additional productivity 
gains, this increase represents some 3% of total statutory staff. It will also provide for an 
additional important investment in the development of an adequate IT system – as 
recommended by a recent report of the Court of Auditors.. The 50 additional temporary 
posts are those covered by Article 2a of the RAA and will therefore not increase the 
current total number of permanent posts in the Commission. 

It would be possible to provide for this additional expenditure within an overall ceiling 
of 6.0% of the budget. The Commission therefore proposes to lower the overall ceiling 
for human resources and other administrative expenditure for the two indirect, nonnuclear programmes from 7.0% in the 5th Framework Programme to 6.0% in the Sixth 
Framework-programme. This ceiling of 6.0% still expresses the Commission’s 
determination to rethink and improve the implementation of the Framework 
Programme, within the constraints of the Common Position. It is conditional on being 
able to achieve the degree of simplification in management proposed in the Rules of 
Participation proposed by the Commission in September 2001. 

(COM(2000) 788 -C5-0036/2001 -2000/0337(CNS)) 

100



The Commission has the intention of reviewing this ceiling of 6% for 2006, and making 
recommendations, before proposing the next framework programme, in the light of the 
experience in implementing the 6th framework programme and of the use of the new 
instruments. This review will examine the scope for additional gains in efficiency in the 
management of the programme, including the possibility for further reductions in 
administrative costs. 

The proposed ceiling for administrative and personnel costs requires also efficient 
programme and budget structures, and this reduced 6.0 % ceiling should apply for the 
total of the two indirect, non-nuclear research programmes. It requires equitable efforts 
in productivity gains in all research activities. In implementing these programmes, the 
Commission will ensure an appropriate share of administrative expenditure between the 
services responsible for managing research activities. This share will take account of the 
overall budget to be managed, the intensity of the use of the three new instruments, the 
labour-intensiveness and the latest technological developments of the activities at the 
various stages of their life-cycle, including their length, and the need to ensure effective 
management of the contracts committed under previous Framework Programmes. 

7.1. Impact on human resources 
Types of post 
Staff to be assigned to management of the 
action using existing and/or additional 
resources 
Total 
Description of tasks deriving 
from the action 
Number of 
permanent posts 
Number of 
temporary posts 
Permanent 
officials or 
Temporary staff 
A 
B 
C 
626 667 
195 209 
329 351 
If necessary, a fuller description 
of the tasks may be annexed. 
Other human resources 
500 600 to 650 630 
person/years 
See costs 
Total 1150 1227 

There is a specific establishment plan in 2001 for the indirect research actions comprising a 
total of 954 A posts, 273 B posts and 427 C posts, giving a total of 1654 posts (EC and 
EURATOM, including SAB 3/2001). 

To this establishment plan should be added 166 156 operating budget posts with no financial 
impact on the budget for these programmes, under the heading of participation in the 
formulation and implementation of research policy. 

The estimated reinforcement of 50 posts is now to be added to these figures giving a total 
of 1704 posts (EC and EURATOM), of which 50 are temporary, and 156 operating 
budget posts (see point 7). 

7.2 Overall financial impact of human resource 
Type of human resources Amount €million Method of calculation* 
Officials 
Temporary research staff 
400.000 425.000 
On the basis of an extrapolation of 
actual cost in 2000 for this personnel, 
inflation of 2% per annum et and an 
average vacancy rate of 8%. a 
declining average vacancy rate to 
reach the overall Commission 
average 

101



Other human resources 
(give budget line) 
100.000 to 130.000 
122.000 to 128.000 
On the basis of an extrapolation of 
actual costs in 2000 and the forecast 
of expenditure in 2001/2002 and 
taking into account the objective 
described at the beginning of point 7 
Total 
500.000 to 530.000 
547.000 to 553.000 
Financed from B6 (research budget) 

The amounts correspond to total expenditure for the duration of the programme. 

7.3 Other administrative expenditure deriving from the action 
Budget line 
(No and heading) Amount €million Method of calculation 
(B6) 
Missions, operation, infrastructure, IT, 
communication (depending on the types of 
expenditure authorised in the table of 
equivalence for indirect RTD actions) 
157.000 to 187.000 
218.300 to 224.300 
On the basis of an extrapolation of 
actual costs in 2000 and the forecast 
of expenditure in 2001/2002 and 
taking into account the objective 
described at the beginning of point 7 
Total 157.000 to 187.000 
218.300 to 224.300 
Financed from B6 (research budget) 

The amounts correspond to total expenditure for the action for the four years of 
implementation of this specific programme, i.e. total annual expenditure of €172.000 
€193.000 million. 

I. Total (7.2 + 7.3) (€million) 687.000 771.300 
II. Duration of action (years) 4 
III. Indicative annual cost (€million) 172.000 193.000 

8. FOLLOW-UP AND EVALUATION 
8.1 Follow-up arrangements 
The specific programmes are designed to help bring about the European Research Area and 
they will be implemented in parallel with and in close collaboration with other Community 
and national activities in pursuit of the same objectives. The very nature of research and the 
different types of actions at different levels make it difficult to determine causes and effects, 
and monitoring and evaluating the result and impact are complex. 

Based on the experience of the earlier programmes and methodological studies in progress, a 
series of instruments has already been or is being finalised in order to develop the objectives 
and monitor and evaluate the results and impact of the framework programme and 
programmes implementing it, as well as the activities relating to bringing about the ERA. The 
Commission will take stock of the development of these instruments in good time before the 
programmes are implemented. 

By these means, a structured system for collection of information and statistics will be 
progressively put in place. Within this context general indicators specifically adapted to the 
framework programme will be developed, to make it possible to evaluate in particular the 

102



contributions of the programmes in relation to the challenges facing the EU identified in point 

5.1 (Investment in RTD and in knowledge, overall and in the priority fields for the EU, 
human RTD resources, exploitation of RTD results, coherence of national and Community 
research policies and with regard to research infrastructures). 
In addition, more specific indicators will be identified for the different objectives of the 
programmes; relating in particular to the production, management and networking, 
exploitation and impact of the knowledge arising from the activities carried out under the 
programmes. First thoughts in this connection are already indicated in point 5.2 under the 
heading of results expected, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters. 

8.2 Arrangements and schedule for the planned evaluation 
– Annual monitoring: The Commission will, where appropriate by calling upon 
suitable expertise, continuously monitor the implementation of the Framework 
Programme and the specific programmes in the light of the objectives set. It will 
assess, in particular, whether the objectives, priorities, instruments, financial 
resources and management are still appropriate to the changing situation. 
The objective is to step up and improve the systematic collection, coherence and 
quality of the basic information, in order to allow efficient analysis and monitoring 
as well as a substantial contribution to the five-year assessment. In order to make 
Community research managers more aware of issues relating to the monitoring of the 
implementation and the results and the impact of the programmes, it is also planned 
to draw up a joint self-assessment format. In addition, measures will be taken to 
ensure greater coherence between the monitoring of the framework programme, the 
specific programmes and progress with the European Research Area. 

– Annual report: Progress with implementing the Framework Programme and the 
specific programmes will be published in the annual report submitted to the 
European Parliament and the Council pursuant to Article 173 of the Treaty. It will set 
out in particular the results of the annual monitoring, a description of the activities 
carried out in the field of research and technological development, realisation of the 
European Research Area and dissemination of results during the preceding year, and 
the work programme for the current year. 
In 2004 an evaluation will be undertaken by independent experts of the 
efficiency of each of the three types of instruments implementing the priority 
thematic areas (networks of excellence, integrated projects, and the stairways of 
excellence-specific targeted research projects and co-ordination actions-). 

– Five-year assessment: Before submitting its proposal for the next Framework 
Programme and the specific programmes, the Commission will have an assessment 
carried out by independent high-level experts of the implementation of Community 
activities during the five years preceding that assessment, the achievement of the 
objectives and the impact of the activities in the light of the objectives applicable to 
the periods in question. The Commission will communicate the conclusions of this 
assessment, accompanied by its observations, to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. 
103



9. ANTI-FRAUD MEASURES 
By submitting reports which may give rise to the consolidation of revenue in the participants' 
accounts, the financial coordinator should make all the financial documentation available to 
the Commission to enable it to carry out its financial audits, indicating the timetable and the 
consolidation of the participants' accounts. 

Where appropriate, the Commission will carry out such financial audits, in particular if it has 
reasons to doubt the realistic nature of the account vis-à-vis the progress of work described in 
the activity reports. 

The Community's financial audits will be carried out either by its own staff or by accounting 
experts approved according to the law of the participant audited. The Community will chose 
the latter freely, while avoiding any risks of conflicts of interest which might be indicated to it 
by the participant subject to the audit. 

In addition, the Commission will make sure in carrying out the research activities, that the 
financial interests of the European Communities are protected by effective checks and, in case 
of detected irregularities, measures as well as deterrent and proportionate sanctions. 

In order to achieve this aim, rules on checks, measures and sanctions, with references to the 
Regulations No 2988/95,02185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 will be taken up in all legal 
instruments used in the implementation of the programmes, including the specific contracts 
and the model contracts. 

In particular, the following points will have to be provided for in the contracts : 

– the introduction of specific contractual clauses to protect the financial interests of the 
EC in carrying out checks and controls in relation to the awards ; 
– the participation of administrative checks in the field of fraud-fighting, in accordance 
with Regulations No 2185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 ; 
– the application of administrative sanctions for all intentional or negligent 
irregularities in the implementation of the contracts, in accordance with the 
framework Regulation No 2988/95, including a black listing mechanism ; 
– the fact that possible recovery orders in case of irregularities and fraud be 
enforceable according to Article 256 of the EC Treaty. 
104



Amended proposal for a
COUNCIL DECISION


adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research, 
technological development and demonstration : aimed at 

“structuring the European Research Area” 

(2002-2006) 

105



2001/0123 (CNS) 

Amended proposal for a 

COUNCIL DECISION 

adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research, 
technological development and demonstration : aimed at 
“structuring the European Research Area” 

(2002-2006) 

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 
166 thereof, 

Having regard to the proposal from the Commission32 

Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament33 

Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee34 

Whereas: 

(1) In accordance with Article 166 (3) of the Treaty Decision No. …/../EC35 of […] of the 
European Parliament and the Council concerning the sixth multi-annual framework 
programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technological 
development and demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation 
of the European Research Area (hereinafter referred to as "the framework 
programme") is to be implemented through specific programmes that define detailed 
rules for their implementation, fix their duration and provide for the means deemed 
necessary. 
(2) The framework-programme 2002-2006 is organised in three main blocks of activities, 
“Focusing and integrating Community research”, “structuring the European 
Research Area” and “strengthening the foundations of the European Research Area”, 
the second of which should be implemented by this specific programme. 
(3) The rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities and 
for the dissemination of research results, for the framework programme, adopted by 
32 

OJ No. 

33 

OJ No. 

34 

OJ No. 

35 

OJ No. 

106



the European Parliament and Council in Decision No. …/../EC36 (hereinafter referred 
to as "the rules for participation and dissemination") should apply to this programme. 

(4) New instruments, involving simplified and decentralised management, and the 
exploitation of external technical support should, if fully exploited in this programme 
The importance of the new instruments (Integrated Projects and Networks of 
Excellence) is recognised as being an overall priority means to attain the 
objectives of critical mass, management simplification and European added value 
contributed by Community research in relation to what is already undertaken at 
national level, and of the integration of the research capacities. They should 
enable personnel and administrative expenses to be reduced to a maximum of 5.5 
6.0% of the overall amount deemed necessary for it’s the implementation of the 
programme. 

(5) As provided for under Article 170 of the Treaty, this programme is open to the 
participation of countries having concluded the necessary agreements to this 
effect, and is also open on the project level, and on the basis of mutual benefit, to 
the participation of entities from third countries and of international 
organisations for scientific co-operation. 
(6) In implementing this programme, emphasis should be given to the needs of SMEs 
and encouraging their participation. of SMEs, and it may be appropriate to engage in 
international co-operation activities with third countries and international 
organisations. Special attention should be paid to the Accession countries. 
(7) Research activities carried out within this programme should respect fundamental 
ethical principles, notably those which appear in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of 
the European Union. 
(8) Following the Commission Communication "Women and Science"37 and the 
Resolutions of the Council38 and the European Parliament39 on this theme, an action 
plan is being implemented in order to reinforce and increase the place and role of 
women in science and research, and further enhanced action is needed. 
(9) Participation in the activities of this programme will be encouraged through 
publication of the necessary information on content, conditions and procedures, 
to be made available in a timely and thorough manner to potential participants, 
including those from the associated candidate countries and other associated 
countries. Specific activities will be undertaken in support of participation of 
scientists and institutions from developing countries, Mediterranean countries 
including the Western Balkans as well as Russia and the NIS. 
(10) This programme should will be implemented in a flexible, efficient and transparent 
manner, taking account of relevant interests, in particular of the scientific, industrial, 
user and policy communities; the research activities carried out under it should be 
adapted where appropriate to the needs of Community policies and to scientific and 
technological developments. 
36 

OJ No 

37 

COM(1999) 76 

38 

Resolution of 20 May 1999, OJ C 201, 16.7.1999 

39 

Resolution of 3 February 2000, PE 284.656 

107



(11) Since the measures for the implementation of this Decision are management measures 
within the meaning of Article 2 of Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 
laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the 
Commission40, they should be adopted by the use of the management procedure 
provided for in Article 4 of that Decision. 
(12) The Commission should in due course arrange for an independent assessment to be 
conducted concerning the activities carried out in the fields covered by this 
programme, which will be done in a spirit of openness with respect to all the 
relevant actors. 
HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION 

Article 1 

1. In accordance with the framework programme, a specific programme on structuring 
the research area (hereinafter referred to as "the specific programme") is hereby 
adopted for the period from […..] to 31 December 2006. 
2. The objectives and scientific and technological priorities for the specific programme 
are set out in Annex I. 
Article 2 

In accordance with Annex II to the framework programme, the amount deemed necessary for 
the execution of the specific programme is EUR 3 050 2 655 million, including a maximum 
of 5.5 6.0% for the Commission’s administrative expenditure. An indicative breakdown of 
this amount is given in Annex II. 

Article 3 

All research activities carried out under the specific programme must be carried out in 
compliance with fundamental ethical principles. 

Article 34 

1. The detailed rules for financial participation by the Community in the specific 
programme shall be those referred to in Article 2(2) of the framework programme. 
2. Instruments for implementing the specific programme are defined in Annexes I and 
III to the framework programme and described in Annex III. 
3. The rules for participation and dissemination shall apply to the specific programme. 
OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 

108



Article 45 

1. The Commission shall draw up a work programme for the implementation of the 
specific programme, setting out in greater detail the objectives and scientific and 
technological priorities set out in Annex I, and the timetable for implementation. 
2. The work programme shall take account of relevant research activities carried out by 
the Member States, Associated States and European and international organisations. 
It shall be updated where appropriate. 
Article 56 

1. The Commission shall be responsible for the implementation of the specific 
programme. 
2. The procedure laid down in Article 67 shall apply for the adoption of the following 
measures: 
– the drawing up and updating of the work programme referred to in Article 5(1), 
including the instruments to be used on a priority basis, and any 
subsequent adjustment to their use; 
– any adjustment to the indicative breakdown of the amount as set out in Annex 
II. 
Article 67 

1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee, composed of representatives of 
the Member States and chaired by the representative of the Commission. 
2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, the management procedure laid down in 
Article 4 of Decision 1999/468/EC41 shall apply, in compliance with Article 7 (3) 
thereof. 
3. The period provided for in Article 4(3) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be two 
months. 
Article 78 

1. The Commission shall regularly report on the overall progress of the implementation 
of the specific programme, in accordance with Article 4 of the framework 
programme; information on financial aspects shall be included. 
2. The Commission shall arrange for the independent monitoring and assessment 
provided for in Article 56 of the framework programme to be conducted concerning 
the activities carried out in the fields covered by the specific programme. 
OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 

109



Article 89 

This decision is addressed to the Member States. 
Done at Brussels, 

For the Council 
The President 

110



ANNEX I
Scientific and technological objectives and broad lines of the activities


Introduction 

This programme will attack a number of key structural weaknesses that are manifested across 
all fields of European research and which are likely to have progressively more important 
effects on the EU’s capacity to meet the aspirations of its citizens as its economies and 
societies become more knowledge-based. It will: 

– enhance the propensity, at all levels, to turn research into useful and commercially 
valuable innovations; 
– promote the development of human resources which constitute the underlying raw 
material on which research capabilities must be built, as well as the mobility of 
researchers – and of their knowledge and expertise -between European countries and 
to Europe from outside; 
– stimulate the development and upgrading of research infrastructures of the highest 
quality on a more rational and cost-effective basis, and make facilities and associated 
resources more universally available to researchers throughout Europe who are able 
to benefit from them; 
– develop the means for more constructive and effective communication and dialogue 
between research and citizens in general, so as to enable society at large to have a 
better-informed and more constructive influence on the future development and 
governance of science, technology and innovation. 
By their nature and means of implementation, the activities carried out within this programme 
are applicable to all fields of research and technology. They have specific vocations, distinct 
from, and complementary to, the activities implemented within other parts of the framework 
programme, notably those within the “Integrating and strengthening the European Research 
Area” programme in the priority thematic areas defined for EU research in that programme, 
and attention will be given to ensure coherence with them. 

This complementary relationship will be reflected in: 

– improved provisions for human resource development and knowledge transfer 
arising from the implementation of the activities covered by this programme, which 
would apply, inter alia, to the thematic priority areas of research, as well as research 
infrastructures of broad application, including those crossing the boundaries between 
priority areas; 
– the use, as appropriate, of consistent methods and tools to promote innovation 
through research and to reconcile better research with the concerns of society, as well 
as consistent frameworks for the implementation of actions on human resources, 
infrastructure support and ensuring the ethical conduct of research, which may be 
implemented, inter alia, within the context of integrated projects and networks of 
excellence. 
Participation of the candidate countries in this programme will be encouraged. 

111



During the implementation of this programme and in the research activities arising 
from it, fundamental ethical principles are to be respected. These include the principles 
set out in the Charter of fundamental rights of the EU, including the following: 
protection of human dignity and human life, protection of personal data and privacy, as 
well as animals and the environment in accordance with Community law and relevant 
international conventions and codes of conduct, e.g. the Helsinki Declaration in its latest 
version, the Convention of the Council of Europe on Human Rights and Biomedicine 
signed in Oviedo on 4 April 1997, and the Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of 
Cloning Human Beings signed in Paris on 12 January 1998, the UN Convention on the 
Rights of the Child, the Universal Declaration on the human genome and human rights 
adopted by UNESCO, and the relevant World Health Organisation (WHO)resolutions. 

Account will also be taken to the opinions of the European Group of Advisers on the 
Ethical Implications of Biotechnology ( 1991 –1997) and the opinions of the European 
Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies( as from 1998) 

Participants in research projects must conform to current legislation and regulations in 
the countries where the research will be carried out. Where appropriate, participants in 
research projects must seek the approval of the relevant ethics committees prior to the 
start of the RTD activities. An ethical review will be implemented systematically for 
proposals dealing with sensitive issues. In specific cases, an ethical review may take 
place during the implementation of a project. 

The following fields of research shall not be financed under this programme: 

– research activity aiming at human cloning for reproductive purposes; 
– research activity intended to modify the genetic heritage of human beings which 
could make such changes heritable42; 
– research activities intended to create human embryos solely for the purpose of 
research or for the purpose of stem cell procurement, including by means of 
somatic cell nuclear transfer. 
In accordance with the Amsterdam protocol on animal protection and welfare, animal 
experiments must be replaced with alternatives wherever possible. Suffering by animals 
must be avoided or kept to a minimum. This particularly applies (pursuant to Directive 
86/609/EEC) to animal experiments involving species which are closest to human beings. 
Altering the genetic heritage of animals and cloning of animals may be considered only 
if the aims are ethically justified and the conditions are such that the animals’ welfare is 
guaranteed and the principles of biodiversity are respected. 

Where appropriate, participants in research projects must seek the approval of the 
relevant ethics committees prior to the start of the RTD activities. An ethical review at 
EC level will be implemented systematically for proposals dealing with sensitive issues. 
In specific cases, an ethical review may take place during the implementation of a 
project. 

Research relating to cancer treatment of the gonads can be financed. 

112



1. RESEARCH AND INNOVATION 
Objectives 

The overall aim is to make a tangible improvement in Europe’s innovation performance, in 
the short, medium and long term, by stimulating a better integration between research and 
innovation, and by working towards a more coherent and innovation-friendly policy and 
regulatory environment across the European Union. 

To this end, and in accordance with the objectives of the communication43 “Innovation in a 
knowledge-driven economy”, activities will be implemented in a number of specific areas that 
are complementary and mutually supportive, within themselves and with the actions carried 
out under the heading “integrating and strengthening the European Research Area”. They will 
focus on improving the knowledge, understanding and capabilities of the actors involved – 
researchers, industrialists, investors, public authorities at European, national and regional 
levels, and others – by encouraging more intensive and fruitful interactions between them, 
and by providing strategic information and services, as well developing new methodologies 
and tools, to assist them in their particular endeavours. A general principle underlying all 
these actions is that innovation cannot be separated from research ; the actions serve to 
reinforce the links between research and innovation, from the point of the conception of 
research activities, right through the period of their realisation. 

To strengthen their structuring effect in Europe, these activities will, where appropriate, be 
carried out in cooperation with other forums or organisations at regional, national or European 
level, such as the Structural Funds or the EIB and the EIF in the context of the "Innovation 
2000 Initiative", as well as in co-ordination with structural Funds measures in this field. 

Activities envisaged 

i) Networking the players and users and encouraging interaction between them 

The effectiveness of innovation systems depends on the intensity of interactions and 
exchanges between the players concerned. The European networks involved in this activity 
will, among other things, have the aim of encouraging interfaces between research and 
industry and between business and funding. The activities will concern the encouragement 
and validation of local and regional initiatives to promote the creation and development of 
innovative businesses; the involvement of users in the innovation process; exchanges of 
good practice and the implementation of transnational cooperation involving universities, 
incubators, risk capital funds, etc.; and the optimisation of practices with regard to 
communication, training, transfer and sharing of knowledge between universities, businesses 
and the financial world. 

ii) Encouraging transregional cooperation 

The regional level is the most appropriate for putting in place innovation strategies and 
programmes involving the main local players. The purpose of this activity, to be carried out in 
close cooperation with activities in the context of regional policy and the Structural Funds, 
will be to promote exchanges of information on specific innovation-related themes; facilitate 
transfers of good practice and put in place innovation strategies in the regions in countries due 

COM(2000)567, of 20.9.2000 

113



to join the EU; and encourage the carrying out at regional and trans-regional level of 
schemes or measures that have proved successful at European level. 

iii) Experimenting with new tools and approaches 

The purpose of these activities is to experiment with new innovation concepts and methods 
addressing in particular critical points in the innovation process. These activities will 
concern experimenting on a European scale with new concepts applied in a national or 
regional environment to promote innovation and the setting-up of innovative businesses; 
analysis of the potential, for reproducing and/or exploiting proven methods, tools or results in 
new contexts; and putting into place integrated platforms making it possible to input and 
disseminate knowledge and know-how concerning the socio-technical processes of 
innovation. 

iv) Putting services in place and consolidating them 

The establishment of the European Research Area and the gradual integration of innovation 
systems in Europe will require a supply of information and services transcending the existing 
national fragmentation. The activities to be carried out will concern the CORDIS research and 
innovation information service, which will be supplemented by other media in order to reach 
the various target populations; the network of innovation relay centres, the geographical 
coverage of which will continue to be extended, and which will be supplemented by 
instruments to encourage the transnational transfer of knowledge and technologies; and 
information and support services in fields such as intellectual or industrial property and access 
to innovation funding. 

v) Stepping up economic and technological intelligence 

In the knowledge-based economy, economic and technological intelligence is a vital 
component of competitive research and innovation strategies. The activities to be carried out 
will centre on the innovation players: SMEs, researcher-entrepreneurs and investors. They 
will mainly involve intermediaries working with/for these players as well as organisations 
with economic and technological intelligence expertise. They will concentrate on specific 
S&T themes or industrial sectors and may concern: innovation promotion in SMEs, in 
particular by means of activities aimed at facilitating their participation in the Community 
research programmes; support for activities concerning the gathering, analysis and 
dissemination of information on S&T developments, applications and markets which may be 
of assistance to the stakeholders; and identification and dissemination of best practice with 
regard to economic and technological intelligence. 

vi) Analysing and evaluating innovation in Community research projects 

The research and innovation activities carried out in the context of Community projects, in 
particular within the networks of excellence and the integrated projects, represent a plentiful 
source of information about obstacles to innovation and the practices to be deployed in order 
to overcome them. The ex-post analysis of these practices will concern the gathering and 
analysis of information about measures taken to promote innovation in Community projects, 
as well as the obstacles encountered and the actions needed to remove them; the comparison 
of experience derived from Community projects with the lessons learnt from other national or 
intergovernmental programmes and the validation of the information obtained; and the active 
dissemination of this information among businesses and other participants in the generation 
and exploitation of knowledge. 

114



2. HUMAN RESOURCES AND MOBILITY 
Today’s knowledge-based societies are heavily dependent on their capacity to produce, 
transfer and utilise knowledge. This requires mobilising cognitive resources, beginning with 
the research community. The overall strategic objective of the Human Resources and 
Mobility activity is to provide broad support for the development of abundant and dynamic 
world-class human resources in the European research system, taking into account the 
inherent international dimension of research. 

The mobility of researchers will be promoted with a view to the successful creation of 
the European Research area. This will involve a coherent set of actions, largely based on 
the financing of structured mobility schemes for researchers. These will essentially be geared 
at the development and transfer of research competencies, the consolidation and widening of 
researchers' career prospects, and the promotion of excellence in European research. The 
widely-recognised Marie Curie name will apply to all the actions concerned. 

The activity will be open to all fields of scientific and technological research that contribute to 
the Community's RTD objectives. However, in order to respond to the evolution of 
Europe's requirements in this area, the possibility of refining priorities, as regards for 
example, scientific disciplines, participating regions, types of research organisations, and the 
level of experience potential of the targeted researcher populations, especially women and 
younger researchers will be retained, and will take into account measures taken towards 
creating synergies in the area of higher education in Europe.inorder to respondtothe 
evolution of Europe's requirements in the area. 

Attention will be paid to: 

– the participation of women within all actions, and appropriate measures to promote a 
more equitable balance between men and women in research. 
– the personal circumstances relating to mobility, particularly with respect to the 
family, career development and languages. 
– the development of research activity in the less-favoured regions of the EU and 
Associated Countries, and to the need for increased and more effective co-operation 
between research disciplines and between academia and industry, including SMEs. 
With a view to further reinforcing the human potential for European research, this activity 
will also aim to attract the best and most promising researchers from third countries44, 
promote the training of European researchers abroad and stimulate the return of European 
scientists established outside Europe. 

Actions to be pursued 

Three main strands of actions will be implemented. 

i) Host-driven actions 

Participation and funding of researchers from third countries is foreseen in all of the host-driven 
mobility schemes (section -i), as well as in one of the individual-driven schemes (section -ii). In such 
cases, account will be taken of any relevant arrangements between the EU and those countries -or 
groups of countries, as well as of the relevant Framework Programme participation and financing rules 

115



This first strand is aimed at supporting research networks, research organisations and 
enterprises, including (in particular SMEs), in the provision of structured global schemes for 
the transnational training and mobility of researchers, and the development and transfer of 
competencies in research. The actions concerned are intended to have a strong structuring 
effect on the European research system, in particular by encouraging junior researchers to 
pursue a research career. Training elements in this strand will be directed at researchers at the 
early stages (typically the first 4 years) of their research careers, such as those who are 
undertaking a doctoral degree, while the transfer of competencies and knowledge will involve 
more experienced researchers. These actions are also intended to encourage mobility 
between different sectors. 

– Marie Curie Research Training Networks – These provide the means for research 
teams of recognised international stature to link up, in the context of a well-defined 
collaborative research project, in order to formulate and implement a structured 
training programme for researchers in a particular field of research. Networks will 
provide a cohesive, but flexible framework for the training and professional 
development of researchers, especially in the early stages of their research career. 
Networks also aim to achieve a critical mass of qualified researchers, especially in 
areas that are highly-specialised and/or fragmented; and to contribute to overcoming 
institutional and disciplinary boundaries, notably through the promotion of 
multidisciplinary research. They will also provide a straightforward and effective 
means to involve the less-favoured regions of the EU and Associated Countries in 
internationally-recognised European research co-operation. Partners will be given 
significant autonomy and flexibility in the detailed operation of the networks. The 
duration of a network will typically be 4 years, with associated fellowships of up to 3 
years, including short-term stays. 
– Marie Curie Host Fellowships for Early Stage Research Training -These will be 
targeted at higher education and research institutions, training centres and 
enterprises, with a view to reinforcing their training capability. The scheme will be 
directed at researchers in the early stages of their professional career. It will focus on 
the acquisition of specific scientific and technological competencies in research, as 
well as of complementary skills such as those relating to research management 
and ethics. Hosts will be selected on the basis of their area of specialisation in 
research training. The associated fellowships will allow for fellows' stays for up to a 
maximum duration of 3 years. The scheme will also work towards more co-ordinated 
approaches to training among the organisations concerned, particularly between 
those involved in international doctoral studies. 
– Marie Curie Host Fellowships for the Transfer of Knowledge -These will be 
directed at European organisations (universities, research centres, enterprises, etc.) in 
need of developing new areas of competence, as well as at furthering the 
development of research capabilities in the less-favoured regions of the EU and 
Associated countries. Knowledge transfer fellowships will allow experienced 
researchers to be hosted at such organisations for the transfer of knowledge, research 
competencies and technology. Fellowships will have a maximum duration of 2 years. 
– Marie Curie Conferences and Training Courses -These will enable junior 
researchers to benefit from the experience of leading researchers. Support will be 
given to specific training activities (including virtual ones) that highlight particular 
European achievements and interests. Two categories of measures are foreseen: the 
first concerns support for a coherent series of high-level conferences and/or training 
116



courses (summer schools, laboratory courses etc.) proposed by a single organiser, 
and covering one or several a specific themes or several linked themes; the second 
involves support for the participation of junior researchers in large conferences 
selected for their specific training interest. Such activities would typically be for a 
few days, but could extend to a few weeks, for example in the case of summer 
schools. 

ii) Individual-driven actions 

This second strand of actions concerns the support to individual researchers, in response to 
Europe's their particular needs with a view to complement in terms of acquisition and 
transfer of individual competencies in research in particular in terms of multidisciplinarity 
and research management, in the process of reaching a position of professional maturity 
and independence. It also addresses the linkages between European and third countries’ 
researchers. It also addresses the professional re-integration of European researchers who 
have benefited from the Marie Curie scheme, as well as the return to Europe of European 
researchers who have been abroad for longer periods. It involves a number of schemes 
organised according to the geographical origin and destination of the researcher. Participation 
in these schemes will be open to researchers with at least 4 years of research experience, 
including those in possession of a doctorate degree. 

– Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowships -these will allow the most promising 
researchers from EU and Associated countries to undertake training through research 
in the European organisations most appropriate to their individual needs. The 
application will be made by the fellow in conjunction with the host organisation. The 
topic will be freely chosen by the researcher in collaboration with the host, with a 
view to completing or diversifying his/her expertise. These fellowships will have a 
duration of 1 to 2 years. 
– Marie Curie Outgoing International Fellowships -These will be awarded to 
researchers from EU and Associated countries to work in established third country 
research centres, thereby widening their international experience in research. This 
scheme will require the submission of a coherent individual training programme, 
involving a first phase abroad, followed by a mandatory second phase in Europe. 
This support should allow for a sufficently long training period. 
– Marie Curie Incoming International Fellowships -These will aim at attracting 
high-level researchers and promising young top-class researchers from third 
countries to work and undertake research training in Europe, with the view to 
developing mutually-beneficial research co-operation between Europe and third 
countries. In the case of emerging economies and developing countries, the scheme 
may include provision to assist fellows to return to their country of origin. 
– Marie Curie Re-integration Grants -These will be directed at researchers from the 
EU and Associated countries who have just completed a Marie Curie fellowship of at 
least two years. It will consist of a lump sum in the form of a personal grant to be 
used within one year. It will be allocated to the fellow on the basis of the submission 
of a defined project, which will be evaluated on its own merits. The re-integration 
would not be restricted to the researcher's country of origin. A similar mechanism 
(but covering a period of re-integration of up to two years) will apply to European 
researchers who have carried out research outside Europe for at least 5 years. 
117



iii) Excellence Promotion and Recognition 

This third strand of actions will focus on the promotion and recognition of excellence in 
European research, thereby increasing its visibility and attractiveness. It will aim at promoting 
European research teams, especially in new and/or emerging areas of research, and at 
highlighting personal achievements of European researchers, with a view to supporting their 
further development and international recognition, while also promoting the diffusion of their 
work for the benefit of the scientific community. 

– Marie Curie Excellence Grants -These aim at providing support for the creation 
and development to individual researchers or of European research teams of the 
which are considered to have the potential to reach a highest level of excellence 
for the establishment or expansion of their teams, more particularly for leading edge 
or interdisciplinary research activities. The grant will cover a period of up to 4 years 
and will be awarded on the basis of a well-defined research programme. 
– Marie Curie Excellence Awards -These are scientific prizes aim at the to give 
public recognition to of the excellence achieved by researchers who have in the past 
benefited from training and mobility support by the Community. Prize money will be 
awarded as a grant to be used for professional advancement, with the obligation to 
report within two years about the use made of the grant. Beneficiaries may propose 
themselves or be proposed by others. 
– Marie Curie Chairs -These will be awarded for the purpose of making top-level 
appointments, in particular to attract world-class researchers and encourage them to 
resume their careers in Europe. Awards will normally have a duration of three years. 
This scheme may be developed in synergy with the host-driven actions. 
iv) Return and Reintegration Mechanisms 

A further mechanism Marie Curie Return and Reintegration Grants will be directed at 
researchers from the EU and associated countries who have just completed a Marie 
Curie fellowship of at least two years. It will consist of a lump sum, in the form of a 
grant to be used within one year following the term of the Marie Curie action. It will be 
allocated to the fellows on the basis of a defined project, which will be evaluated on its 
own merits. The mechanism will assist the professional reintegration of the researcher, 
the priority being given to reintegration in his or her country or region of origin. 

A similar mechanism, but covering a longer period, up to two years, will apply to 
European researchers who have carried out research outside Europe for at least 5 years, 
with or without having benefited from a Marie Curie action. 

Co-operation with Member States and Associated Countries 

The Human Resources and Mobility activity will seek to co-finance initiatives which foster 
co-operation and create synergies with and within national and regional programmes where 
these coincide with the specific objectives of the schemes outlined above. Such co-operation 
will be established on the basis of relevant Community criteria, with a view to creating 
genuine access to these initiatives for all EU and Associated Country researchers, as well as 
promoting the adoption of mutually-recognised research training standards. 

In terms of management of the activity, beyond the increased importance of host-driven 
actions, Initiatives will be undertaken to reinforce co-operation with Member States and 

118



Associated Countries in the provision of 'proximity support' to researchers, which is a key 
element of any mobility scheme for researchers moving within or returning to Europe. In 
particular, this could be undertaken through the co-financing of support to the networking 
of existing and new structures, at national or regional level, with the aim of providing 
practical assistance to foreign researchers in matters (legal, administrative, familial or 
cultural) relating to their mobility. 

A further aspect of this co-operation might concern a number of tasks associated with the 
management of the activity, beyond the increased importance of host-driven actions. In 
that context, envisaging alternative ways of management and follow up of individual 
fellowship contracts. This would require prior establishment of a clear demarcation of tasks 
and responsibilities in accordance with Community financial regulations and rules, and the 
undertaking of relevant cost/benefit analyses. 

Internal, Framework Programme Co-operation 

The role of the Human Resources and Mobility activity is to support research training and the 
development of research competencies. This does not preclude other activities within the new 
Framework Programme from incorporating similar elements. The Human Resources and 
Mobility activity will provide assistance with regard to the adoption of consistent criteria in 
relation to the evaluation, selection and monitoring of such actions, as well as the promotion 
of common approaches among the activities, with a view to ensuring coherence and 
developing possible synergies, and an equitable balance in the participation of men and 
women. 

3. RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES 
The ability of Europe’s research teams to remain at the forefront of all fields of science and 
technology depends on their being supported by state-of-the-art infrastructures. The term 
“research infrastructures” refers to facilities and resources that provide essential services to 
the research community in both academic and industrial domains. Research infrastructures 
may be “single-sited” (single resource at a single location), “distributed” (a network of 
distributed resources, including infrastructures based on Grid-type architectures), or “virtual” 
(the service being provided electronically). 

The overall objective of this activity is to promote the development of a fabric of research 
infrastructures of the highest quality and performance in Europe, and their optimum use on a 
European scale based on the needs expressed by the research community. Specifically this 
will aim at: 

– ensuring that European researchers may have access to the infrastructures they 
require to conduct their research, irrespective of the location of the 
infrastructure; 
– providing support for a co-ordinated approach for the development of new 
research infrastructures, also at the regional and transregional level,and for 
the operation and enhancement of existing infrastructures, including where 
appropriate facilities of world-wide relevance not existing in Europe. 
Where relevant, support for research infrastructures in this programme will be implemented in 
association with the thematic priorities of the Framework Programme and with the other 
available forms of support. 

119



Five schemes for support will be implemented: 

– Transnational Access. The objective is to sponsor new opportunities for research 
teams (including individual researchers) to obtain access to individual major research 
infrastructures most appropriate for their work. Community financing will cover the 
necessary operating costs of providing access to such infrastructures for research 
teams working in Member States and Associated States other than the state where the 
operator of a given infrastructure is located. 
– Integrating Activities. The objective is to support the provision of essential services 
to the research community at European level. This may cover, in addition to 
transnational access, the establishment and operation of co-operation networks, 
and the execution of joint research projects, raising the level of the performance 
of the infrastructures concerned. For this purpose the initiatives combine cooperation networks with one or more other specific activities, including for example 
transnational access and research activities to improve the performance of the 
infrastructure. The scheme will also encourage the bridging of gaps that may limit 
the potential for exploitation of research results by industry, including SME’s. 
Integrated initiatives Integrating activities will be selected on the basis of a widescale but flexible scientific and technological programme of European dimension 
aiming, where appropriate, at the long-term sustainability of the programme. This 
scheme may be implemented through Integrated Infrastructure Initiatives and 
Co-ordination Actions. 
– Communication Network Development. The objective of this scheme in support of 
existing research infrastructures is to create, in conjunction with the priority 
thematic research area on Information Society Technologies, a denser network 
between related initiatives, in particular by establishing a broadband communications 
network for all researchers in Europe and specific high performance Grids and testbeds a high-capacity and high-speed communications network for all 
researchers in Europe (GEANT) and specific high performance Grids and testbeds (GRIDs), as well as electronic publishing services. 
– Design studies. The objective is to contribute, on a case-by-case basis, to feasibility 
studies and technical preparatory work for those new infrastructures to be undertaken 
by one or a number of Member States, which have a clear European dimension and 
interest, taking into account the needs of all potential users and systematically 
exploring the possibilities of contributions from other sources, including the 
EIB or the Structural Funds for the funding of these infrastructures. 
– Development of new infrastructures. In appropriate circumstances, this scheme 
could contribute towards the development of a new infrastructure alongside with 
other funding agencies Optimising of European infrastructures by providing 
limited support for the development of a restricted number of projects for new 
infrastructures in duly justified cases where such support could have a critical 
catalysing effect in terms of European added value. This support, taking due 
account of Member States' opinion, may supplement contributions from the 
EIB or the Structural Funds to the funding of these infrastructures. 
In general, funding provided for new or enhanced infrastructures will be limited to the 
minimum necessary to catalyse the activity; the major part of construction and operation, and 
the long-term sustainability of the infrastructures in question being assured by national and/or 

120



other sources of finance. Such funding would only be provided on the basis of a detailed 
justification, based on European added value, addressing the scientific, legal and financial 
dimensions of the proposed development. Feasibility studies and technical preparatory work 
should investigate the possibilities of combining funding with other sources of finance from 
the European Union (e.g. the European Investment Bank and the Structural Funds). 

Broadband communication networks, which are highly relevant to the political goals set out 
by the European Research Area and the e-Europe initiative, should also be used as a means to 
enhance scientific co-operation with third countries. 

Support for research infrastructures in this programme should, where relevant, take into 
account existing or future mechanisms for a co-ordinated approach to research infrastructures 
in Europe (e.g. National Research and Education Networks – NRENS), aswell asthe 
scientific advice of existing European and international organisations (e.g. European Science 
Foundation – ESF). Accompanying measures under this programme may be implemented, 
where appropriate, to sustain these mechanisms. 

4. SCIENCE AND SOCIETY 
Today, and even more in the knowledge-based society of tomorrow, science and technology 
have a ubiquitous presence throughout the economy and in everyday life. If they are to realise 
their full potential in securing a continually-increasing quality of life – in the broadest sense 
to Europe’s citizens, new relations and a more productive dialogue between the scientific 
community, industrialists, policy-makers and society at large will be needed. 

Such a dialogue cannot be confined to the EU alone. It must be international in scope, taking 
full account of the enlargement perspective and the global context. Given the very broad 
range of issues and interactions that are implied in the relations between science and 
technology, on one hand, and the broader community, on the other, these considerations must 
be integrated within all areas of activity of the framework programme. The role of this 
specific activity is to develop the structural links between the institutions and activities 
concerned and provide a central focus, through common reference frameworks and the 
development of appropriate tools and approaches, to guide activities in this domain covered 
by the different parts of the framework programme. 

It will be implemented by means of networks, benchmarking, exchange of best practices, 
developing and promoting awareness of methodologies, studies and the bringing together of 
national efforts. In specific cases, where appropriate, dedicated research will be supported. 

i) Bringing research closer to society 

The aim is to examine systematically the various components of “science and governance” in 
order to create conditions under which policy decisions are more effective in meeting 
society’s needs, more soundly based in science and at the same take account of the concerns 
of civil society. This requires consideration of effective processes of dialogue on emerging 
scientific and technological issues ultimately having consequences for prospective policy 
development; developing appropriate means for creating scientific references and channelling 
scientific advice to policy makers; and equipping the latter with tools to assess and manage 
scientific uncertainty, risk and precaution. 

– Science and governance: analysing and support to best practice; developing new 
consultation mechanisms to promote more productive involvement of civil society 
121



and relevant stakeholders in policy formulation and implementation, including the 
communication of scientific outputs necessary to decision taking in terms readily 
understandable to civil society and other stakeholders; monitoring activities 
concerning the functioning of policy-making processes to assess the interaction 
between experts, industry, civil society and policy-makers. 

– Scientific advice and reference systems: exchange of experience and good practice; 
monitoring the production of scientific advice world-wide and how this advice is 
provided as input to decision; developing new and better methodologies for reliable 
and recognised reference systems; ensuring the smooth operation and effective use of 
the European Research Advisory Body and its sub-committees in order to provide 
scientific advice for the development of the European research area. 
ii) Responsible research and application of science and technology 

The aim is to ensure that rapidly advancing progress in science is in harmony with the ethical 
values of all Europeans. Activities will promote "responsible research" in Europe, in which 
the requirements for investigative freedom are better reconciled with social and environmental 
responsibilities in the development and application of science and technology, as well as the 
public dialogue, monitoring, and early warning, of ethical and social issues, and risks arising 
from new technological developments, for the benefit of national and international policy 
makers and other interested groups. 

– Ethics: networking between existing ethics bodies and activities in Europe, and 
promotion of dialogue on ethics in research with other regions in the global context; 
awareness raising and training activities in ethics; co-ordination and development of 
codes of conduct for research activities and technological developments; research on 
ethics in relation to science, technology developments and their applications, for 
example, in relation to information society, nanotechnologies, human genetics and 
biomedical research and in food technologies. 
– Uncertainty, risk, and implementing the precautionary principle: analysis and 
support to best practice in the application of the precautionary principle in different 
areas of policy making and in the assessment, management and communication of 
uncertainty and risk. 
iii) Stepping up the science/society dialogue and women in science 

Support for the responsible development of science and technology requires not only a 
continued dialogue between the relevant stakeholder, but also better public awareness of 
scientific and technological advances and their possible implications, and a wider 
understanding of scientific and innovation culture. There are also particular needs to stimulate 
young peoples’ interest in science, to increase the attractiveness of scientific careers, and to 
make progress towards gender equality in research, which will also enhance human resources 
and improve levels of excellence in European research 

– Public understanding: supporting awareness-raising events and the recognition of 
achievements in European research; analysis of the factors influencing public 
opinion, including the role of the media and science communicators; developing new 
ways of raising public awareness and knowledge; encourage comprehensive 
“stakeholder” debates and stimulate awareness for innovation in society. 
122



– Young peoples’ interest in scientific careers: initiatives to attract the younger 
generation to participate in the discussion on science and technology and their 
societal impact and to raise the S&T awareness among youth; support for the 
development of better approaches to science for girls and boys within and outside the 
formal education system, and for actions concerning a better understanding of the 
relative attractiveness and social aspects of taking science as a career. 
– Women and Science: actions to stimulate the policy debate at national and regional 
level to mobilise woman scientists and boost the participation of the private sector; 
promoting the enhancement of the Gender Watch System and associated activities to 
promote gender equality throughout the framework programme; specific actions to 
develop a better understanding of the gender issue in science. 
123



ANNEX II
INDICATIVE BREAKDOWN OF THE AMOUNT


Types of activities Amount (EUR million) 
Research and Innovation 
Human Resources 
Research infrastructures 
Science / society 
300 
1 630 
66545 
60 
Total 2 655 

Including up to EUR 200 million for the further development of Géant and GRID. 

124 


ANNEX III – MEANS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAMME


In order to implement the specific programme, and in accordance with the Decisions of the 
European Parliament and of the Council concerning the multiannual Framework Programme 
2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technological development and 
demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research 
Area (2002/…/EC) and with the rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres 
and universities and for the dissemination of research results (2002/…/EC), the Commission 
may use, across the whole field of science and technology: 

– experimental projects relating to innovation aimed at experimenting with, validating 
and disseminating on a European scale new innovation concepts and methods in the 
area of "Research and innovation". 
– specific targeted projects in order to carry out research or demonstration activities in 
thearea of "Scienceand society". 
– integrated initiatives relating to infrastructure, combining activities that are essential 
for strengthening and developing research infrastructures for the provision of 
services on a European scale, in the area of "Research infrastructures". 
– mobility and training actions implementing certain Marie Curie activities such as 
research training networks, conferences and training courses and individual training 
fellowships in the area of "Human resources and mobility". 
– specific coordination and support actions in order to achieve the objectives identified 
in all the areas of the programme. 
– accompanying actions by way of additional measures to achieve the objectives of the 
programme or to prepare future activities in the context of the Community's research 
and technological development policy. 
– Specific targeted innovation projects implemented in the area of “Research and 
innovation”. They are designed to test, validate and disseminate new innovation 
concepts and methods at the European level. 
– Specific targeted research projects implemented in the area of “Science and 
society”. They shall be sharply focussed and will take either of the following two 
forms, or a combination of the two: 
(a) a research and technological development project designed to gain new 
knowledge either to improve considerably or to develop new products, 
processes or services or to meet other needs of society and Community 
policies; 
(b) a demonstration project designed to prove the viability of new 
technologies offering potential economic advantage but which cannot be 
commercialised directly. 
– Integrated infrastructure initiatives implemented in the area of “Research 
infrastructure”. They shall combine in a single action several activities essential 
to reinforce and develop research infrastructures, in order to provide services at 

125



the European level. To this end, they shall combine networking activities with a 
support activity (such as relating to transnational access) or research activities 
needed to improve infrastructure performance, excluding, however, the 
financing of investment for new infrastructures, which can only be financed as 
specific support actions. They will include a component of dissemination of 
knowledge to potential users, including industry and in particular to SMEs. 

– Actions to promote and develop human resources and mobility implemented in 
the area of “Human resources and mobility”. They will be targeted at training, 
development of expertise or transfer of knowledge. They will involve support to 
actions carried out by natural persons, host structures, including training 
networks, and also by European research teams. 
– Coordination actions implemented in all the areas of the programme. They are 
intended to promote and support the coordinated initiatives of a range of 
research and innovation operators aiming at improved integration. They will 
cover activities such as the organisation of conferences, meetings, the 
performance of studies, exchanges of personnel, the exchange and dissemination 
of good practices, setting up information systems and expert groups, and may, if 
necessary, include support for the definition, organisation and management of 
joint or common initiatives. 
– Specific support actions implemented in all the areas of the programme. They 
will complement the implementation of the Framework Programme and may be 
used to help in preparations for future Community research and technological 
development policy activities including monitoring and assessment activities. In 
particular, they will involve conferences, seminars, studies and analyses, high 
level scientific awards and competitions, working groups and expert groups, 
operational support and dissemination, information and communication 
activities, or a combination of these, as appropriate in each case. They may also 
include actions in support of research infrastructure relating to, for instance, 
transnational access or preparatory technical work (including feasibility 
studies) and the development of new infrastructure. 
The Commission will evaluate the proposals in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out 
in the above mentioned Decisions. in order to verify their relevance with regard to the 
objectives of the programme, their scientific and technological excellence, their Community 
added value and the participants' management capacity. 

The Community contribution will be granted in accordance with the above mentioned 
decisions and in compliance with the Community framework for state aid for research. 
In the case of participation of bodies from regions lagging in development, it may be possible 
to obtain complementary funding from the Structural Funds within the limits specified by 

when a project receives the maximum intensity of co-financing authorised under the 
framework programme or an overall grant, an additional contribution from the 
Structural Funds, pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/99, could be granted. 

the Community framework for state aid for research. 

In the case of participation of entities from the candidate countries, an additional 
contribution from the pre-accession financial instruments could be granted under 
similar conditions. 

126



In the case of participation of organisations from Mediterranean or developing 
countries, a contribution of the MEDA programme and of the financial instruments of 
the Community’s aid to development could be envisaged. 

Actions under Articles 169 and 171 of the Treaty which contribute to the scientific and 
technological objectives set out in Annex I may be supported financially by the specific 
programme, in accordance with the relevant decisions under Article 172 of the Treaty. 

In carrying out the programme, the Commission may have recourse to technical 
assistance. 

127



LEGISLATIVE FINANCIAL STATEMENT


Policy area(s): Research
Activity(ies): Research actions under the EC Treaty.


TITLE OF ACTION 

Proposal for a Council Decision adopting a specific programme 
for research, technological development and demonstration 
activities aimed at "Structuring the European Research Area" 

1. BUDGET LINE(S) + HEADING(S) 
Subsection B6 6 Indirect Actions: these lines will be specified at the beginning of the 
2003 budget procedure, taking into account the ABB nomenclature, which is being 
drawn up. 

2. OVERALL FIGURES 
2.1. Total allocation for action (Part B): €3 050 €2 655 million for commitments 
2.2. Period of application: 
2002-2006 

2.3. Overall multiannual estimate of expenditure: 
a) Schedule of commitment appropriations/payment appropriations (financial 
intervention) (see point 6.1.1) 

€ million (to 3rd decimal place) 

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 + Total 
Commitments 660.500 
573.700 
708.000 
613.500 
744.300 
643.700 
769.400 
664.800 
-2882.200 
2495.700 
Payments 81.500 
69.700 
372.000 
320.500 
523.300 
451.700 
618.400 
533.800 
1.287.000 
1119.00 
2882.200 
2495.700 

b) Technical and administrative assistance and support expenditure (see point 6.1.2) 
This budget category does not apply in this field. 

128 


c) Overall financial impact of human resources and other administrative expenditure 

(see points 7.2 and 7.3) 

Commitments/Pa 
yments 
42.500 
38.300 
42.000 
39.500 
41.700 
40.300 
41.600 
41.200 
-167.800 
159.300 

TOTAL 
a+b+c 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 + Total 
Commitments 703.000 
612.000 
750.000 
653.000 
786.000 
684.000 
811.000 
706.000 
-3 050.000 
2 655.000 
Payments 124.000 
108.000 
414.000 
360.000 
565.000 
492.000 
660.000 
575.000 
1 287.000 
1 120.000 
3 050.000 
2 655.000 

2.4. Compatibility with the financial programming and the financial perspective 
x Proposal compatible with the existing financial programming 

. This proposal will entail reprogramming of the relevant heading in the 
financial perspective. 
. This may entail application of the provisions of the Interinstitutional 
Agreement. 
2.5 Financial impact on revenue 
. No financial implications (involves technical aspects regarding implementation 
of a measure) 
OR 

x Financial impact – the effect on revenue is as follows: 

Certain Associated States will contribute to the funding of the Specific Programme. 

These association agreements are linked to a Framework Programme. Their renewal 
will be renegotiated following adoption of the new Framework Programme and it is 
therefore impossible to forecast the amount of revenue in question. 

In accordance with Article 27 of the Financial Regulation, certain revenue may be 
reused. 

129



3. BUDGET CHARACTERISTICS
Type of expenditure New EFTA 
participation 
Participation 
applicant 
countries 
Heading 
Financial 
Perspective 
Comp/ 
Non-comp 
Diff/Nondiff 
YES/NO YES/NO YES/NO No 3 

4. LEGAL BASIS 
Article 166 of the EC Treaty. 

Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council adopting the 
framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research, 
technological development and demonstration activities aimed at contributing 
towards the creation of the European Research Area. 

5. DESCRIPTION AND GROUNDS 
5.1. Need for Community intervention 
5.1.1 Objectives pursued 
As recognised at the highest political level by the European Council in Lisbon, Feira, Nice 
and again recently in Stockholm, research is a central component of the knowledge-based 
economy and society developing worldwide. The objective set for the EU in Lisbon was "to 
become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable 
of sustainable economic growth, more and better jobs and greater social cohesion" over the 
next decade. More than ever, research is proving to be one of the main driving forces for 
economic and social progress, a key factor in business competitiveness, employment and the 
quality of life. In addition, science and technology are key elements in the policy-making 
process at both EU and national level. 

However, Europe still has structural weaknesses where research is concerned. These can be 
summedup infour main points: 

I. Insufficient and dispersed investment in research and technological development and 
more generally in knowledge (RTD, education and software), with the result that we 
are lagging behind our competitors. In 1999, the EU invested EUR 76 billion less 
than the US in research and development. It is now lagging behind its competitors in 
terms of research spending as a proportion of GDP (in 1999, the figure was 1.9% for 
the EU compared with 2.6% for the US and 2.9% for Japan46). In 1999, the US 
invested some 9% in knowledge, ahead of the EU (7.6%) and Japan (6.9%). And the 
gap is continuingtowiden. 
II. Insufficient human resources in research. Researchers represent 5.3/1000 of the 
workforce in the EU (1998), 7.4/1000 in the US (1993) and 8.9/1000 in Japan (1998) 
where there are twice as many researchers in industry. Direct public spending on 
46 

1998 figure. 

130



higher education corresponds to 0.9% of GDP in the EU, 1.4% in the US and 0.5% in 
Japan (1997). 

III. A limited capacity to translate scientific breakthroughs into innovative and 
competitive products and services, despite high-quality scientific production. The 
figures for the number of patents granted by the European, American and Japanese 
patents offices per million inhabitants are 32 in the EU, 49 in the US and 88 in Japan. 
In 1998, the trade balance for high-tech products was a €28 billion deficit for the EU 
(a trend confirmed throughout the decade), compared with a €8 billion deficits for 
the US and an EUR 39 billion surplus for Japan. Risk capital investment in the 
advanced sectors corresponds to 80% in the US and, while it is on the increase, only 
26 % in the EU and 23% in Japan. 
IV. A fragmentation of research policies in Europe. The EU has not yet adopted a 
fully-fledged research policy. The 15 national policies co-exist side by side and 
alongside the Community framework programme without adequate coordination 
between them to achieve efficient organisation and exploitation. This lack of 
coordination also affects the establishment and efficient exploitation of research 
infrastructures. 
To alleviate this situation, the Commission has proposed and Council and Parliament have 
endorsed the creation of a "European Research Area". Bringing it about will necessarily be 
the product of a joint effort by the Community, the Member States and research stakeholders. 
The Community research framework programmes (2002-2006) and the specific programmes 
will make a contribution to this in particular through the significant leverage effect that they 
can have for integrating, coordinating and structuring research in the EU and strengthening 
the foundations of the European Research Area. 

A structural change in the EU's S&T fabric to remedy the above mentioned weaknesses will 
need resources commensurate with the objective. The Commission has proposed funding for 
the framework programme totalling EUR 17.5 billion, corresponding to the previous level of 
funding plus inflation and growth (but still representing only 5 to 6% of public spending on 
RTD). The Commission takes the view that this sort of amount could have a significant effect 
on the research system as such, improve at least some of the overall research indicators, and 
have a significant effect in the priority areas of the framework programme which will 
generate growth in the EU. In overall terms, this level of funding will make it possible to 
maintain the Community's RTD effort expressed as percentage of GDP at its present level 
during the period 2003-2006. 

The plan is to implement the framework programmes by five specific programmes, three of 
which come under the European Community Treaty and two under the European Atomic 
Energy (Euratom) Treaty. Each specific programme is identified according to the nature of 
the instruments deployed, reflecting the objectives and organisation of the framework 
programme: 

– A programme on "Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area" 
comprising the indirect actions proposed under the heading "Integrating research" 
and under the heading "Strengthening the foundations of the European Research 
Area", thus bring together research and coordination activities. 
– A programme on "Structuring the European Research Area", comprising horizontal, 
support and structuring activities. 
131



– Two "Joint Research Centre (JRC)" programmes comprising the direct actions 
carried out by the JRC in the non-nuclear and nuclear fields respectively. 

– A "Nuclear energy" programme comprising the indirect actions carried out in the 
field of nuclear energy. 
The objectives of the specific programme "Structuring the European Research Area" are set 
out below by action areas, together with their justification and the European added value that 
they can provide. 

1. Research and innovation 
The objective of these actions is to promote technological innovation, the exploitation of 
research results, the transfer of knowledge and technologies and the setting-up of technology 
businesses within the Community and all its regions. 

Justification and European added value 

– Need to reduce performance gaps between European regions 
– Need to promote policies and development strategies for innovation 
– Need for participants in Community research actions to have information and 
specialised services on a European scale 
– At present, information about economic and technological trends is lacking or does 
not have a sufficiently high profile 
– Need to promote cooperation between players with additional know-how in order to 
innovate. 
2. Human resources and mobility 
The objective of the activities carried out under this heading is to provide support for the 
development of abundant and world-class human resources in all the regions of the 
Community, by promoting trans-national mobility for training purposes, the development of 
expertise or the transfer of knowledge in particular between different sectors; support for the 
development of scientific excellence; and helping to make Europe more attractive to 
third-country researchers. This should be achieved by attempting to make the most of the 
potential of all components of the population, and more particularly women, by taking 
appropriate measures to this end. 

Justification and European added value 

– Low proportion of European workforce in R&D (5.3 in every thousand in 1998) 
compared to US (7.4 in 1993) and Japan (8.9 in 1998). 
– Brain drain to the US of European scientists, with stay rates of up to 50 % (in 1998) 
after completion of a doctoral degree in the US. 
– Low take up in 1998 of scientific studies and academic research assignments, with 
23% of people aged 20 to 29 years in the EU in higher education, compared to 39% 
in the USA and 21% in Japan. 
132



– Rigidity of academic careers and more attractive career prospects in industry. 
– Differing national and regional laws and practices affecting the mobility of 
researchers. 
3. Research infrastructures 
The objective of the activities carried out under this heading is to help establish a fabric of 
research infrastructures at the highest level in Europe and to promote their optimum use on a 
European scale. 

Justification and European added value 

– Obstacles remain to transnational access to facilities. 
– The potential of electronic communications networks is not yet fully exploited. 
– Multinational funding agreements are difficult to establish. 
– Technological development related to infrastructures is handicapped by a lack of 
critical mass. 
4. Science and society 
The objective of the actions carried out under this heading is to encourage the development in 
Europe of harmonious relations between science and society and openness to innovation as a 
result of establishing new relationships and an informed dialogue between researchers, 
industrialists, policy makers and citizens. 

Justification and European added value 

– Recent events in Europe, such as BSE, GMOs, have resulted in a loss of public 
confidence in science and technology 
– Policy-makers have required rapid and precise answers to complex scientific issues, 
usually transcending geographical boundaries 
– Traditional methods of education appear to be failing 
– Women are widely underrepresented in scientific research (for instance, women 
represent 50% of the graduates in Europe, but account for only 10% of the full 
professors). 
5.1.2 Measures taken in connection with ex ante evaluation 
An ex-ante evaluation was carried out by the Commission services when preparing the 
specific programme proposals. Its results reflect in particular: 

– the recommendations of the five-year assessment of the framework programmes and 
specific programmes carried out by independent experts in the course of the 
year 2000; 
133



– the Commission's mid-term review of the fifth framework programme (1998-2002) 
presented in COM(2000)612 of 4 October 2000 and detailed in Commission staff 
paper SEC(2000)1780 of 23 October 2000; 
– wide-ranging consultations among the protagonists relating to the two 
communications on the European Research Area in the course of the year 200047 and 
the framework programme proposal at the beginning of 2001; 
– a series of internal and external Commission studies relating to economic, political 
and foresight areas and the impact of RTD activities. 
The results of the ex-ante evaluation carried out are reflected in particular in the choices made 
with regard to the structure of the programmes, the objectives and priorities and the 
implementing instruments. 

The objectives and priorities were selected in accordance with the rigorous application of the 
criterion of European added value. 

This covers the following aspects applied to the priority themes and activities selected, the 
justification and European added value of which are described in greater detail in point 5.1. 
and the expected results in point 5.2. 

– Importance of collaboration in economic terms (economies of scale) and as a result 
of its beneficial effects on the private research effort and industrial competitiveness 
– Maintenance or development of the position of the EU in RTD areas strategic for the 
EU 
– Need to combine the complementary expertise present in the different countries, 
more particularly in the face of interdisciplinary problems and the need to have 
recourse to comparative studies on a European scale 
– Links with the priority interests of the EU as well as with Community legislation and 
policies 
– The necessarily transnational nature of the research as the result of the scale on 
which the problems arise or for scientific reasons. 
With regard to the implementing instruments, new instruments, which by their nature can 
only be implemented at Community level, have been designed to contribute at EU level to: 

– promoting the interaction between research and innovation 
– developing human resources and reinforcing mobility 
– supporting research infrastructures 
– developing harmonious relations between science and society. 
These instruments and the corresponding objectives are described in point 5.2. 

COM (2000) 612 of 4 October 2000
COM (2000) 6 of 18 January 2000


134



5.1.3 Measures taken following ex post evaluation 
The recommendations of the five-year assessment of the framework programmes and the 
specific programmes carried out in 2000 have been taken into account in preparing the 
specific programme proposals, in particular those concerning: 

– the need to make up for Europe's trailing position in the field of RTD compared with 
its competitors; 
– the need for complementarity and coherence between national and Community RTD 
policies and the essential role of the Commission in achieving this objective; 
– the beneficial impact of the framework programme which "fills a gap in Europe by 
enabling researchers in universities and in industry to carry out applied work 
together"; 
– the need to lighten the procedures of the 1998-2002 programme and the need to 
"rethink the structures and procedures for managing the framework programme"; 
– placing Community research activities in the broader context of a genuine European 
research policy; 
– reinforcing the concentration of the programmes; 
– continuing with the research needed to achieve the objectives of Community 
policies; 
– the desired move towards an adapted range of instruments that are more flexible, 
taking account of all the possibilities offered by the Treaty. 
In addition, the mid-term review of the fifth framework programme has resulted in particular 
in adjustments to the annual work programmes for the specific programmes, aimed at 
concentrating efforts to a greater extent and launching pilot projects for the measures 
envisaged for the next framework programme (networks, clusters, industrial platforms, 
larger-scale projects, etc.). 

5.2. Actions envisaged and means of budget intervention 
The actions envisaged for the specific programme on "Structuring the European Research 
Area" are set out below presented by detailed action areas. This presentation makes it possible 
to highlight the estimated results expected, the contributions to the overall objectives of the 
framework programme or of the Community or potential performance parameters associated 
with these. These indications are intended as yardsticks and not definitively adopted goals. 

A correspondence between the action areas and the types of instruments used is given further 
on in the form of a table. 

1. Research and innovation 
i) Networking the players and encouraging interaction between them 

ii) Encouraging transregional cooperation 

135



iii) Experimenting with new tools and approaches 
iv) Putting services in place and consolidating them 
v) Stepping up economic and technological intelligence 
vi) Analysing and evaluating innovation in the Community research projects 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 

– Increasing the number of business "start-ups" 
– Increasing the amount of risk capital invested in innovative businesses 
– Increasing the number of collaborations established between regions and with the 
associated countries 
– Increasing the number of users and the number of transactions involving specifically 
European information services 
– Doubling the number of members of networks working with SMEs. 
2. Human resources and mobility 
i) Host-driven actions 

(Marie Curie Research Training Networks, Marie Curie Host Fellowships for Early 
Stage Research Training, Marie Curie Host Fellowships for the Transfer of 
Knowledge, Marie Curie Conferences and Training Courses) 

ii) Individual-driven actions 

(Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowships, Marie Curie Outgoing International 
Fellowships, Marie Curie Incoming International Fellowships, Marie Curie Reintegration Grants) 

iii) Excellence Promotion and Recognition 

(Marie Curie Excellence Grants, Marie Curie Excellence Awards, Marie Curie 
Chairs) 

(Cooperation with Member States and Associated Countries, Internal Framework 
Programme Co-operation) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 

– Evaluation of the number of international collaborative projects and individual 
moves, countries involved, length of stays, age of the researchers. 
– Evaluation of the number of researchers/researcher-months, age profile, disciplines 
and types of training. 
– Increase in the number of permanent positions following mobility 
136



– Promotion of the return to Europe of European scientists 
– Increase in the number of researchers/teams awarded. 
3. Research infrastructures 
Integrating ed Initiatives activities,
Communication network development,
Transnational Access,
Design studies,
Development of new infrastructures.


Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 

– Provision of access to, or services from, around 100 infrastructures for on average 
about 8,000 researchers per € 100 million of financing 
– Promotion of co-operation among on average about 100 participants in 10 networks 
or research projects per € 100 million of financing. 
– Increase of the number of new techniques, technologies or electronic networks, 
which will significantly enhance the provision of services by relevant infrastructures 
in their fields. 
4. Science and society 
i) Bringing research closer to society 

(Science and governance, Scientific advice and reference systems) 

ii) Responsible development and application of science and technology 

(Ethics, Uncertainty, risk and implementing the precautionary principle) 

iii) Stepping up the science/society dialogue and women in science 

(Public understanding, Young peoples’ interest in scientific careers, Women and 
Science) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 

– Guidelines for science and governance, and scientific reference systems, aimed at 
better connection between the scientific community, policy-makers and civil society. 
– Mapping of the scientific advice structures in the EU and world-wide 
– Carrying out ethical reviews in order to ensure the adherence to ethical principals in 
Community research activities, and developing codes of conduct 
– To reach the objective of 40% for women’s participation in assemblies and panels. 
137



The means of intervention and financial participation under the framework programme will be 
as follows, according to the objectives: 

Areas Themes/activities Types of instruments(1) Financial participation under 
the framework programme 
Networking the players and encouraging 
interaction between them 
-Specific targeted 
innovation projects 
-coordination actions 
-specific support actions 
Grant to the budget 
Encouraging transregional cooperation 
Promoting 
interaction 
between 
research and 
innovation 
Experimenting with new tools and approaches 
Putting services in place and consolidating them 
Stepping up economic and technological 
intelligence 
Analysing and evaluating innovation in the 
Community research projects 
Marie Curie research training networks Mobility and training actions Grant to the budget 
Marie Curie Host Fellowships for Early Stage 
Research Training 
Marie Curie host fellowships for the transfer of 
knowledge 
Developing 
human 
resources and 
stepping up 
mobility 
Marie Curie conferences and training courses 
Marie Curie intra-European fellowships 
Marie Curie outgoing international fellowships 
Marie Curie incoming international fellowships 
Marie Curie reintegration grants 
Excellence promotion and recognition 
-co-ordination actions 
-specific support actions 
Grant to the budget 
Cooperation with Member States and associated 
countries 

138



Areas Themes/activities Types of instruments(1) Financial participation under 
the framework programme(2) 
Support for 
research 
infrastructures 
Transnational access to research infrastructures Specific support actions Grant to the budget of 
maximum of 100 % of the 
budget (3)(6), if necessary a 
lump sum 
Integrating activities -Integrated infrastructure 
initiatives 
-Co-ordination actions 
Grant to the budget 
depending on the type of 
activity of maximum of 50 % 
to 100 % of the budget (3) (4) 
(5) 
Communication network development -Integrated infrastructure 
initiatives 
-co-ordination actions 
-specific support actions 
Grant to the budget 
(3)(4) (5)(6) 
Technical preparatory work, feasibility studies specific support actions grant to the budget of 
maximum of 100 % of the 
budget (3) (6) if necessary 
as a lump sum 
Development of new infrastructures 
Development of 
harmonious 
relations 
between science 
Science and governance -Specific targeted research 
projects 
-Co-ordination and 
specific support actions 
-co-ordination actions 
-specific support actions 
specific 
Grant to the budget 
and society Scientific advice and expertise 
Ethics 
Risks 
Public understanding of science 
Young peoples’ interest in scientific careers 
Women and science 

(1) Specific support actions can also be implemented throughout the specific programme. 
(2) As a general principle, the Community financial contribution cannot cover 100% of the 
expenditure of an indirect action with the exception of proposals covering a purchase price 
governed by the terms applicable to public procurement procedures or taking the form of a predefined lump sum pre-set by the Commission. 
However, the Community financial contribution may bear up to 100% of the expenditure of an 
indirect action if they complement those otherwise borne by the participants. Also, in the 
specific case of coordination actions, it covers up to 100% of the budget necessary for the 
coordination of activities funded by the participants themselves. 

(3) Subject to specific conditions specific legal entities, particularly public bodies, will receive 
funding of up to 100% of their marginal/additional costs. 
(4) The rates of assistance may be differentiated in accordance with the rules of the Community 
framework for State aid for research and development depending on whether activities relate to 
research (maximum 50 %) or demonstration (maximum 35 %) or to other activities 
implemented, such as training of researchers (maximum 100 %) or the management of the 
consortium (maximum 100 %) 
139



(5) The activities of an integrated initiative relating to infrastructure must include one networking 
activity (co-ordination action: maximum 100 % of the budget) and at least one of the following 
activities: research activities (maximum 50 % of the budget) or service specific activities 
(specific support action, for example, transnational access to research infrastructures: 
maximum 100 % of the budget) 
(6) For actions in support of research infrastructure relating to preparatory technical work 
(including feasibility studies) and the development of new infrastructure, 6th Framework 
Programme participation is restricted to maximum of 50 % and 10 % of the budget 
respectively. 
The Community's budgetary intervention is aimed at businesses (and in particular SMEs), 
research centres, universities and national or European organisations, that fund research 
activities. The latter may also act as intermediaries for the Community's budgetary 
intervention. 

5.3. Means of implementation 
The Commission will ensure the implementation of the actions. In certain duly justified cases, 
it may call upon external bodies for assistance. 

6. FINANCIAL IMPACT 
6.1. Total financial impact on Part B -(over the entire programming period) 
For the record, the reference allocation for the Framework Programme of the 
European Community is EUR 16 275 16.270 million. The total amount for the 
Framework Programmes 2002-2006 is EUR 17 500 million. 

6.1.1 Financial intervention: Commitments in €milllion (to the third decimal place) 
Breakdown by objective Total 
Structuring the European research area 3 050 2 655 
1) Research and innovation 300 
2) Human resources 1 800 1 630 
3) Research infrastructure 900 66548 
4) Science and society 50 60 
TOTAL 3 050 2 655 

An annual schedule for each of these objectives is not significant at this level. It could only be 
defined as being strictly proportional to that for the entire specific programme, itself in line 

Including up to 200 million for the further development of Géant and GRID. 

140 


with that of the framework programme. The annual internal breakdown will be established 
subsequently within the work programmes. 

6.1.2 Technical and administrative assistance, support expenditure and IT expenditure 
(Commitment appropriations) 
This budget category does not apply in this field. 

6.2. Calculation of costs by measure envisaged in Part B (over the entire 
programming period) 
For the indirect actions of the Fifth RTD Framework Programme of the European Community 
(1998-2002), the annual volume is in the order of 3500 new contracts signed (all categories 
included), for an annual budget of € 3000 million. 

For the indirect actions of the Framework Programme 2002-2006, the annual budget will be 
in the order of € 3700 million, an increase in real terms by 13 %. 

Nevertheless, as set out in point 5.1.2, new instruments have been designed for the 
implementation of this new Framework Programme 

Compared to previous Framework Programmes, these instruments go beyond merely 
scientific projects and introduce the concept of integration and structuring of research, in 
particular by critical mass and networking of competences and resources in identified areas. 

As concerns the management of the Framework Programme 2002-2006, this concept of 
critical mass will be reflected in a significant increase of the mean financial contribution to 
projects and is expected to result in a substantial reduction of the number of contracts 
concluded annually. 

7. IMPACT ON STAFF AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE 
Determined to fundamentally modify the implementation of the Framework Programme, the 
Commission proposes to lower the ceiling for human resources and other administrative 
expenditure to 5.5 % for the two indirect, non-nuclear research programmes. 

Currently in the parts of the 5th Framework Programme related to indirect, non-nuclear 
research, the overall ceiling for human resources and other administrative expenditure is 
7.0%. 

On present trends, actual expenditure under the 5th Framework Programme is likely to remain 
close to this ceiling, perhaps a little below. 

Assuming there were to be no change in the methods of implementing the Framework 
Programme, and given the need to allow for some margin in this category of expenditure, the 
Commission would have no reason to depart from the overall ceiling of 7%. This is largely 
because the proposed budget for the next programme increases in line with inflation, allowing 
for a little more in line with growth in the economy. 

Any reduction in the overall ceiling could only be achieved on the assumption of significant 
gains in productivity, including significant changes in the management of the programme. A 
relatively restrictive set of assumptions would include : 

141



– A freeze on the total number of statutory staff at its 2002 level of 1654 posts, 
assuming productivity gains of 2% per annum to compensate for the increase in the 
real volume of the programme 
– An inflation rate of 2% a year, even though staff costs tend to rise at a slightly higher 
rate 
– A freeze in expenditure on external personnel at its 2002 level. 
The above scenario would allow the Commission to propose a reduction in the overall ceiling 
to about 6.3 %. 

The Commission is, however, prepared to commit itself to a much more significant reduction 
in the ceiling from 7.0% to 5.5%. This would allow an important amount of additional 
resources, roughly € 230 million, to be allocated directly to research projects. 

This requires equitable efforts in productivity gains in all research activities. The ceiling of 
5.5% proposed for administrative expenditure is a global one, covering the specific 
programmes “Integrating and Strengthening the European Research Area” and “Structuring 
the European Research Area” as a whole. In implementing these programmes, the 
Commission will ensure an appropriate share of administrative expenditure between the 
services responsible for managing research activities. This share will take account of the 
overall budget to be managed, the intensity of the use of the three new instruments, the 
labour-intensiveness and the latest technological developments of the activities at the various 
stages of their life-cycle, including their length, and the need to ensure effective management 
of the contracts committed under previous Framework Programmes. 

The main factor that would allow this to be achieved is the introduction on a widespread scale 
of the new instruments proposed in the next Framework Programme, namely integrated 
projects, networks of excellence and joint execution of national research programmes under 
Article 169 of the Treaty. These would allow net reductions in the costs of administering the 
programme. 

In other terms, a ceiling of 5.5 % expresses the determination of the Commission to 
fundamentally modify the implementation of the Framework Programme. 

– It is useful to recall that even if the new instruments are used fully in line with the 
Commission’s proposal, their impact on administrative expenditure will be gradual. 
During the 2003-2006 period, an important part of the administrative activities 
undertaken by the Commission will still be to implement and conclude previous 
Framework Programmes. 
The average duration of contracts for indirect research being four years, some 13,000 open 
contracts with a financial volume of € 6,600 million could be expected, at the start of 2003. 

The ceiling of 5.5 % for the human and administrative resources for indirect, non-nuclear 
programmes will therefore require exploiting all the potential of the new management 
approach to the Framework Programme: 

– Full use would need to be made of the new instruments to reduce the number of 
individual projects and contracts to be administered by the Commission. 
– Their management will need to be largely simplified and decentralised. 
142



– All possibilities will need to be exploited to externalise technical support activities 
and certain aspects of the management of specific categories of activities, whenever 
this reduces overall administrative expenditure. 
It requires also efficient programme and budget structures, and this reduced 5.5% ceiling 
should apply for the total of the two indirect, non-nuclear research programmes. 

This proposal is critically dependent on the introduction of the new instruments in line with 
the Commission’s proposal. Any revision of this will imply a change in the ceiling for 
administrative costs. 

Currently in the parts of the 5th Framework Programme related to indirect, nonnuclear research, the overall ceiling for human resources and other administrative 
expenditure is 7.0%. 

Assuming there were to be no change in the methods of implementing the Framework 
Programme, and given the need to allow for some margin in this category of 
expenditure, the Commission would have no reason to depart from this overall ceiling of 
7%. Given that the budget for the Sixth Framework Programme is 17% higher than the 
Fifth Framework Programme, this would have implied a net increase of around 250 
permanent posts on top of the 1654 posts allowed in 2002. 

The Commission is however committed to achieving significant gains in productivity in 
the implementation of the Sixth Framework Programme. This commitment will lead to 
an important reduction of the share linked to personnel and administration costs in 
relation to the previous framework programme. 

In the initial Commission proposal, this would have allowed administrative and 
personnel costs to be reduced to 5.5% of the programme budget, and statutory posts to 
be frozen at the 2002 levels. The main factor that would allow this to be achieved is the 
productivity gains arising from the introduction of the new instruments proposed in the 
next Framework Programme, namely integrated projects, networks of excellence and 
joint execution of national research programmes under Article 169 of the Treaty. In the 
Commission’s original proposal, these instruments would have been used exclusively in 
the implementation of the thematic priorities, which constitute the largest part of the 
framework programme. 

However, as a result of the Council Common Position on the framework programme, 
taking into account the amendments of the European Parliament, the use of the new 
instruments will not be exclusive. , In consequence, the instruments of the Fifth 
Framework programme will continue to be used alongside the new instruments to a 
greater extent than originally envisaged. These instruments generally involve small-scale 
contracts to be concluded directly with the Commission. The direct consequence of this 
decision is a much larger number of contracts to be managed by the Commission 
compared to the initial proposal. The exact number of additional projects to be managed 
cannot be known; on reasonable scenarios, it could be of the order of 25% to 33% 
higher than the original number envisaged. 

This substantial expected increase in the number of contracts to be managed represents 
effectively additional tasks for the Commission. In line with the Commission decision 
following the Peer Group exercise not to accept additional tasks if the corresponding 
resources are not available, an increase in the administrative and personnel resources of 
the framework programme is therefore required. 

143



In order to identify the potential sources for such additional resources, the Commission 
has examined various options: 

– redeployment of human resources: As part of the Peer group exercise, a detailed 
activity-by-activity review was carried out of the management of the 
Framework Programme. Significant economies were identified in the indirect 
non-nuclear research area (98 posts in DG Research representing around 10 % 
of statutory personnel). These economies have now been achieved through 
redeployment and other measures. There appears to be no scope for further 
redeployment in the short to medium term. 
– restructuring of the “tableau des effectifs” by converting C to A and B staff: The 
scope for this option was examined, however it cannot effectively be used, due to 
the fact that support staff in the research sector accounts for 26% of the total, 
which is well below the Commission average of 32%. Any further reduction in 
this percentage would cause difficulties in the management of research 
contracts. 
– vacancy rate: although the current vacancy rate of 8% is higher than the 
Commission average of 4%, it is accounted for by the circumstances applying to 
one specific category of staff, i.e. support staff in category C. It reflects 
historical structural difficulties in recruiting such staff to the research sector, 
where the possibilities have up to now been strictly limited. These difficulties 
are addressed in the Commission’s Communication of 27 December 2001 for 
the Reform of Research Personnel Policy and are expected to diminish in the 
medium-term bringing the average vacancy rate in the research sector down to 
the overall average of the Commission. 
– externalisation: the Commission initial proposal was based largely on the 
exclusive use of the new instruments, whose implementation implies the 
externalisation of a number of management tasks to the organisations actually 
participating in the projects. The Common Position of the Council on the Sixth 
Framework Programme reintroduces into the programme the old instruments, 
effectively requiring the Commission to “internalise” again some of these tasks. 
In addition to the externalisation implied by the use of the new instruments, the 
Commission is examining further externalisation of specific parts of the 
programme, but this assumption was already built into the initial proposal for 
5.5% of administrative costs. This matter will be reviewed after the Council 
regulation laying down the statute for executive agencies to be entrusted with 
certain tasks in the management of Community programmes49 comes into effect. 
The Commission has also examined the scope for further increases in productivity. 
Although the total number of contracts will increase significantly as compared with the 
original proposal, the Commission believes that, with increases in productivity and 
efficiency, the increase in staff resources required to manage these projects can be kept 
less than proportional to the increase in the workload. 

In conclusion, the initial 5.5% of administrative and personnel expenses needs to be 
increased to cover the additional tasks which the Commission has to carry out as a 

(COM(2000) 788 -C5-0036/2001 -2000/0337(CNS)) 

144



result of the Common Position. This increase will primarily cover 50 additional 
statutory posts (28A, 15 B, 7C) of a temporary nature. Reflecting additional productivity 
gains, this increase represents some 3% of total statutory staff. It will also provide for an 
additional important investment in the development of an adequate IT system – as 
recommended by a recent report of the Court of Auditors.. The 50 additional temporary 
posts are those covered by Article 2a of the RAA and will therefore not increase the 
current total number of permanent posts in the Commission. 

It would be possible to provide for this additional expenditure within an overall ceiling 
of 6.0% of the budget. The Commission therefore proposes to lower the overall ceiling 
for human resources and other administrative expenditure for the two indirect, nonnuclear programmes from 7.0% in the 5th Framework Programme to 6.0% in the Sixth 
Framework-programme. This ceiling of 6.0% still expresses the Commission’s 
determination to rethink and improve the implementation of the Framework 
Programme, within the constraints of the Common Position. It is conditional on being 
able to achieve the degree of simplification in management proposed in the Rules of 
Participation proposed by the Commission in September 2001. 

The Commission has the intention of reviewing this ceiling of 6% for 2006, and making 
recommendations, before proposing the next framework programme, in the light of the 
experience in implementing the 6th framework programme and of the use of the new 
instruments. This review will examine the scope for additional gains in efficiency in the 
management of the programme, including the possibility for further reductions in 
administrative costs. 

The proposed ceiling for administrative and personnel costs requires also efficient 
programme and budget structures, and this reduced 6.0 % ceiling should apply for the 
total of the two indirect, non-nuclear research programmes. It requires equitable efforts 
in productivity gains in all research activities. In implementing these programmes, the 
Commission will ensure an appropriate share of administrative expenditure between the 
services responsible for managing research activities. This share will take account of the 
overall budget to be managed, the intensity of the use of the three new instruments, the 
labour-intensiveness and the latest technological developments of the activities at the 
various stages of their life-cycle, including their length, and the need to ensure effective 
management of the contracts committed under previous Framework Programmes. 

7.1. Impact on human resources 
Types of post 
Staff to be assigned to management of the 
action using existing and/or additional 
resources 
Total 
Description of tasks deriving 
from the action 
Number of 
permanent posts 
Number of 
temporary posts 
Permanent 
officials or 
Temporary staff 
A 
B 
C 
153 137 
47 43 
80 73 
If necessary, a fuller description 
of the tasks may be annexed. 
Other human resources 
125 120 to 160 135 
person/years 
See costs 
Total 280 253 

There is a specific establishment plan in 2001 for the indirect research actions comprising a 
total of 954 A posts, 273 B posts and 427 C posts, giving a total of 1654 posts (EC and 
EURATOM, including SAB 3/2001). 

145 


To this establishment plan should be added 166 156 operating budget posts with no financial 
impact on the budget for these programmes, under the heading of participation in the 
formulation and implementation of research policy. 

The estimated reinforcement of 50 posts is now to be added to these figures giving a total 
of 1704 posts (EC and EURATOM), of which 50 are temporary, and 156 operating 
budget posts (see point 7). 

7.2 Overall financial impact of human resource 
Type of human resources Amount €million Method of calculation* 
Officials 
Temporary research staff 
98.000 88.000 
On the basis of an extrapolation of 
actual cost in 2000 for this personnel, 
inflation of 2% per annum et and an 
average vacancy rate of 8%. a 
declining average vacancy rate to 
reach the overall Commission 
average 
Other human resources 
(give budget line) 
25.000 to 32.000 
24.000 to 28.000 
On the basis of an extrapolation of 
actual costs in 2000 and the forecast 
of expenditure in 2001/2002 and 
taking into account the objective 
described at the beginning of point 7 
Total 
123.000 to 130.000 
112.000 to 116.000 
Financed from B6 (research budget) 

The amounts correspond to total expenditure for the duration of the programme. 

7.3 Other administrative expenditure deriving from the action 
Budget line 
(No and heading) Amount €million Method of calculation 
(B6) 
Missions, operation, infrastructure, IT, 
communication (depending on the types of 
expenditure authorised in the table of 
equivalence for indirect RTD actions) 
37.800 to 44.800 
43.200 to 47.200 
On the basis of an extrapolation of 
actual costs in 2000 and the forecast 
of expenditure in 2001/2002 and 
taking into account the objective 
described at the beginning of point 7 
Total 37 800 to 44.800 
43.200 to 47.200 
Financed from B6 (research budget) 

The amounts correspond to total expenditure for the action for the four years of 
implementation of this specific programme, i.e. total annual expenditure of €42.000 €40.000 
million. 

I. Total (7.2 + 7.3) (€million) 167 800 159.300 
II. Duration of action (years) 4 
III. Indicative annual cost (€million) 42 000 40.000 

146



8. FOLLOW-UP AND EVALUATION 
8.1 Follow-up arrangements 
The specific programmes are designed to help bring about the European Research Area and 
they will be implemented in parallel with and in close collaboration with other Community 
and national activities in pursuit of the same objectives. The very nature of research and the 
different types of actions at different levels make it difficult to determine causes and effects, 
and monitoring and evaluating the result and impact are complex. 

Based on the experience of the earlier programmes and methodological studies in progress, a 
series of instruments has already been or is being finalised in order to develop the objectives 
and monitor and evaluate the results and impact of the framework programme and 
programmes implementing it, as well as the activities relating to bringing about the ERA. The 
Commission will take stock of the development of these instruments in good time before the 
programmes are implemented. 

By these means, a structured system for collection of information and statistics will be 
progressively put in place. 

Within this context general indicators specifically adapted to the framework programme will 
be developed, to make it possible to evaluate in particular the contributions of the 
programmes in relation to the challenges facing the EU identified in point 5.1 (Investment in 
RTD and in knowledge, overall and in the priority fields for the EU, human RTD resources, 
exploitation of RTD results, coherence of national and Community research policies and with 
regard to research infrastructures). 

In addition, more specific indicators will be identified for the different objectives of the 
programmes; relating in particular to the production, management and networking, 
exploitation and impact of the knowledge arising from the activities carried out under the 
programmes. First thoughts in this connection are already indicated in point 5.2 under the 
heading of results expected, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters. 

8.2 Arrangements and schedule for the planned evaluation 
– Annual monitoring: The Commission will, where appropriate by calling upon 
suitable expertise, continuously monitor the implementation of the Framework 
Programme and the specific programmes in the light of the objectives set. It will 
assess, in particular, whether the objectives, priorities, instruments, financial 
resources and management are still appropriate to the changing situation. 
The objective is to step up and improve the systematic collection, coherence and 
quality of the basic information, in order to allow efficient analysis and monitoring 
as well as a substantial contribution to the five-year assessment. In order to make 
Community research managers more aware of issues relating to the monitoring of the 
implementation and the results and the impact of the programmes, it is also planned 
to draw up a joint self-assessment format. In addition, measures will be taken to 
ensure greater coherence between the monitoring of the framework programme, the 
specific programmes and progress with the European Research Area. 

– Annual report: Progress with implementing the Framework Programme and the 
specific programmes will be published in the annual report submitted to the 
147



European Parliament and the Council pursuant to Article 173 of the Treaty. It will set 
out in particular the results of the annual monitoring, a description of the activities 
carried out in the field of research and technological development, realisation of the 
European Research Area and dissemination of results during the preceding year, and 
the work programme for the current year. 

– Five-year assessment: Before submitting its proposal for the next Framework 
Programme and the specific programmes, the Commission will have an assessment 
carried out by independent high-level experts of the implementation of Community 
activities during the five years preceding that assessment, the achievement of the 
objectives and the impact of the activities in the light of the objectives applicable to 
the periods in question. The Commission will communicate the conclusions of this 
assessment, accompanied by its observations, to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. 
9. ANTI-FRAUD MEASURES 
By submitting reports which may give rise to the consolidation of revenue in the participants' 
accounts, the financial coordinator should make all the financial documentation available to 
the Commission to enable it to carry out its financial audits, indicating the timetable and the 
consolidation of the participants' accounts. 

Where appropriate, the Commission will carry out such financial audits, in particular if it has 
reasons to doubt the realistic nature of the accounts vis-à-vis the progress of work described 
in the activity reports. 

The Community's financial audits will be carried out either by its own staff or by accounting 
experts approved according to the law of the participant audited. The Community will chose 
the latter freely, while avoiding any risks of conflicts of interest which might be indicated to it 
by the participant subject to the audit. 

In addition, the Commission will make sure in carrying out the research activities, that the 
financial interests of the European Communities are protected by effective checks and, in case 
of detected irregularities, measures as well as deterrent and proportionate sanctions. 

In order to achieve this aim, rules on checks, measures and sanctions, with references to the 
Regulations No 2988/95,02185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 will be taken up in all legal 
instruments used in the implementation of the programmes, including the specific contracts 
and the model contracts. 

In particular, the following points will have to be provided for in the contracts : 

– the introduction of specific contractual clauses to protect the financial interests of the 
EC in carrying out checks and controls in relation to the awards ; 
– the participation of administrative checks in the field of fraud-fighting, in accordance 
with Regulations Nos 2185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 ; 
– the application of administrative sanctions for all intentional or negligent 
irregularities in the implementation of the contracts, in accordance with the 
framework Regulation No 2988/95, including a black listing mechanism ; 
148



– the fact that possible recovery orders in case of irregularities and fraud be 
enforceable according to Article 256 of the EC Treaty. 
149



Amended proposal for a
COUNCIL DECISION


adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research, technological development and 
demonstration to be carried out by means of direct actions by the Joint Research Centre 

(2002-2006)


150



2001/0124 (CNS) 

Amended proposal for a 

COUNCIL DECISION 

adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research, technological development and 
demonstration to be carried out by means of direct actions by the Joint Research Centre 

(2002-2006) 

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 
166(4) thereof, 

Having regard to the proposal from the Commission50 

Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament51 

Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee52 

Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions53 

Whereas: 

(1) In accordance with Article 166 (3) of the Treaty, Decision No…/../EC of […] of the 
European Parliament and the Council concerning the sixth multiannual framework 
programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technological 
development and demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation 
of the European Research Area54 (hereinafter referred to as the "framework 
programme is to be implemented through specific programmes that define detailed 
rules for their implementation, fix their duration and provide for the means deemed 
necessary. 
(2) The framework programme is structured in three main blocks of activities, “Focusing 
and integrating Community research”, “structuring the European Research Area”, 
and “strengthening the foundations of the European Research Area”, within the first of 
which the direct actions conducted by the Joint Research Centre should be 
implemented by this specific programme, while contributing in part to the aims of the 
other two. 
50 

OJ … 

51 

OJ ... 

52 

OJ ... 

53 

OJ … 

54 

OJ…. 

151



(3) The rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities and 
for the dissemination of research results, for the framework programme, adopted by 
the European Parliament and Council in Decision No…/../EC55 (hereafter referred to 
as "the rules for participation and dissemination") should apply to this programme as 
regards dissemination of research results. 
(4) In implementing this programme, emphasis should be given to promoting mobility and 
training of researchers, and innovation, in the Community. 
(5) For the purpose of implementing this programme, in addition to co-operation covered 
by the Agreement on the European Economic Area or by an Association Agreement, it 
may be appropriate to engage in international co-operation activities, in particular on 
the basis of Article 170 of the Treaty, with third countries and international 
organisations. Special attention should be paid to Accession Candidate Countries. 
(6) Research activities carried out within this programme should respect the fundamental 
ethical principles, notably those which appear in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of 
the European Union. 
(7) Following the Commission Communication “Women and Science”56 and the 
Resolutions of the Council57 and the European Parliament58 on this scheme, an action 
plan is being implemented in order to reinforce and increase the place of women in 
science and research, and further enhanced action is needed. 
(8) This programme should be implemented in a flexible, efficient and transparent 
manner, taking account of relevant needs of JRC’s user and Community policies, as 
well as respecting the objective and protecting the communities financial interests. The 
research activities carried out under it should be adapted where appropriate to these 
needs and to scientific and technological developments. 
(9) The JRC should actively pursue activities in innovation and technology transfer. 
(10) In the implementation of this programme, the Board of Governors of the JRC should 
be consulted by the Commission in accordance with the relevant provisions of 
Commission Decision 96/282/Euratom of 10 April 1996 on the reorganisation of the 
Joint Research Centre. 59. 
(11) The Commission should in due course arrange for an independent assessment to be 
conducted concerning the activities carried out in the fields covered by this 
programme. 
152


55 OJ … 
56 
57 
58 
59 
COM(1999)76. 
Resolution of 20 May 1999, OJ C201, 16.7.1999 
Resolution of 3 February 2000, PE 284.656. 
OJ L 107, 30.4.1996, p. 12. 


(12) The Board of Governors of the JRC has been consulted on the scientific and 
technological content of this specific programme, 
153



HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: 

Article 1 

1. In accordance with Decision […] on the framework programme 2002-2006 
(hereinafter referred to as “the framework programme”), a specific programme 
related to direct actions of research, technological development and demonstration to 
be carried out by the Joint Research Centre (hereinafter referred to as "the specific 
programme") is hereby adopted for the period from […..] to 31 December 2006. 
2. The objectives and scientific and technological priorities for the specific programme 
are set out in Annex I. 
Article 2 

In accordance with Annex II to [Decision […/…] / the framework programme], the amount 
deemed necessary for the execution of the specific programme is EUR 715 760 million. An 
indicative breakdown of this amount is given in Annex II to this Decision. 

Article 3 

1. The Commission shall be responsible for the implementation of the specific 
programme. 
2. The specific programme shall be implemented by means of the instruments defined 
in Annexes I and III to the framework programme and in Annex III to this Decision. 
3. The rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities and 
for the dissemination of research results (hereinafter referred to as “the rules for 
participation and dissemination”) set out in Decision […/…] shall apply to the 
specific programme, as regards dissemination of research results. 
Article 4 

1. The Commission shall draw up a work programme for the implementation of the 
specific programme, which shall be made available to all interested parties, setting 
out in greater detail the objectives and scientific and technological priorities, set out 
in Annex I, and the timetable for implementation, and the implementation 
arrangements. 
2. The work programme shall take account of relevant research activities carried out by 
the Member States, Associated States, European and international organisations. It 
shall be updated where appropriate. 
154



Article 5 

For the purposes of implementing the specific programme, the Board of Governors of the JRC 
shall be consulted by the Commission in accordance with Commission Decision 
96/282/Euratom. 

The Commission shall regularly inform the Board of Governors of the implementation of this 
specific programme. 

Article 6 

1. The Commission shall regularly report on the overall progress of the implementation 
of the specific programme, in accordance with Article 4 of the framework 
programme. 
2. The Commission shall arrange for the independent assessment provided for in Article 
5 6 of the framework programme to be conducted concerning the activities carried 
out in the fields covered by the specific programme. 
Article 6 

This decision is addressed to the Member States. 

Done at Brussels, 

For the Council 
The President 

155



ANNEX I


SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL OBJECTIVES AND BROAD OUTLINES OF THE ACTIVITIES 

1. INTRODUCTION 
The Joint Research Centre carries out its work programme with the mission to provide 
customer-driven scientific and technical support for the conception, implementation and 
monitoring of European Union policies. The JRC serves the common interest of the Member 
States while being independent of special interests, private or national, and as such provides 
support when there is a need for European intervention. 

The JRC’s contribution to the Framework Programme incorporates recommendations of 
recent evaluations of the JRC60 and requirements necessitated by the Reform of the 
Commission. In particular, it includes: 

– A strengthened user-orientation 
– Networking activities to create a broad knowledge base and, in the spirit of the 
European Research Area (ERA), more closely associate Member and Accession 
State laboratories, industry and regulators in the S&T support provided to the EU 
policies. 
– The concentration of activities on selected themes; including the training of 
researchers using, in particular, large scale facilities and specialised laboratories. 
It responds to clearly expressed needs and requirements, notably from the Commission 
services, which have been identified and are updated through systematic and regular 
contacts61. 

In its domains of competence, the JRC’s contribution will aim at establishing synergies with 
the relevant thematic priorities in the other specific programmes, notably through 
participation in the indirect action, with a view to add value, when appropriate, to the work 
carried out therein (e.g. through the comparison and validation of tests and methods or the 
integration of results for policy-making purposes). 

The political and institutional context in which the JRC operates has evolved significantly in 
recent years. Rapid technological developments especially in biotechnology and the 
information society are changing our society with new demands on policy makers to 
simultaneously protect the citizen and ensure competitiveness in a global economy. Crises in 
consumer confidence and the growing impact of technology on day to day life have placed the 
onus on policy-makers throughout Europe and the world to secure reliable scientific input 
throughout the whole policy process. This encompasses the ability to respond rapidly in the 
event of unforeseen circumstances and to taking a more responsible view of potential longerterm impact of science and technology developments. The development of common European 

60 

Davignon Report (2000), 5-year assessment of JRC (2000), 1999 JRC Scientific Audit, 2001 
PrioritisationAudit 

61 

Annual users workshops, interservice group of users DGs, bilateral agreements, in association with the 
High Level Users Groupetc. 

156



systems of scientific and technical reference, as foreseen in the ERA, is an important step in 
this direction. 

With the implementation of the JRC’s refocused mission to support EU policies62,the sixth 
Framework Programme 2002-2006 represents a new chapter in how the JRC will perform its 
activities. On its own the JRC cannot be expected to cover the whole spectrum of scientific 
and technical support needed in such context. Three characteristics permeate its proposed 
work programme: i) concentration, (ii) openness and networking and (iii) customerorientation. Appropriate instruments will be set up to meet those objectives with particular 
attention to the clustering of projects contributing to specific policy areas (see Annex III). 

TheJRC, as the in-houseRTD serviceof the Commission, will 

– Provide demand-led S&T support to European policy formulation, development, 
implementation and monitoring in its areas of competence, 
– Contribute to the establishment of common scientific and technical reference systems 
within the European Research Area. 
The thrust of JRC’s support to EU policies lies in the provision of technical support on issues 
related to environmental protection, safety and security of the citizens and sustainable 
development. This includes risk assessment, testing, validation and refinement of methods, 
materials and technologies to support a range of policies -safety of food products, chemicals, 
air quality, water quality, nuclear safety, to protection against fraud. Almost all this support 
will be carried out in close collaboration with laboratories and research centres in Member 
States and elsewhere. To achieve this, the JRC has refocused its non-nuclear activities into 
two core areas, supported by horizontal competencies: 

– Food, chemical products and health 
– Environment and sustainability 
The core areas will be complemented by horizontal activities: 

– Technology foresight 
– Reference materials and measurements 
– Public security and anti-fraud. 
2. PROGRAMME CONTENT 
2.1 Food, chemical products and health 
The health protection of consumers particularly from the potentially harmful effects of 
contaminants in food and of chemical products is a key European policy. This is evidenced by 
the creation of a European Food Authority and the development of a new Community policy 
on chemicals. 

Fulfilling the JRC’s mission in the European Research Area. Communication from the Commission to 
the Council and European Parliament COM(2001)215 of 22.4.2001. 

157



In the framework programme 2002-2006 the JRC will respond to a series of specific 
requirements associated with the rapidly evolving food and chemical Community policies. It 
will develop further as a scientific reference and validation centre in selected areas linked to 
the quality and safety of food, the safety of chemical products, the Community dimension of 
chemical measurement/metrology infrastructure and health-related information. JRC’s 
strategy relies heavily on extensive networking with laboratories in the Member States, on the 
maintenance of advanced analytical facilities and reference measurement and material 
production and on expanded competencies in life sciences including proteomics and 
bioinformatics. Services like information systems, data banks (e.g. molecular register) will be 
provided in support to relevant EU policies. Given the novelty of many issues and the 
complexity of the regulatory environment, training will also be a priority. Work will be 
focused on the following priorities: 

– Food safety and quality 
– Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) 
– Chemical products 
– Biomedical applications 
Food safety and quality 

Emphasis will be on the development and validation of reliable methods and reference 
materials for the detection of contaminants (natural such as mycotoxins and man-made such 
as PCBs), residues (e.g. pesticides, growth hormones and veterinary drugs) and ingredients 
and additives in food as well as in animal feed. JRC’s prime role will be the co-ordination of 
testing of methods and materials and the submission of approved results to support risk 
assessment and management (in close support to the European Community Reference 
Laboratories for Veterinary Residues). As most food-borne diseases derive from 
microbiological including virus contamination, emphasis will be placed on evaluation of new 
approaches for rapid identification and monitoring. Research on genomics and proteomics 
will identify the cause of many food-related problems such as allergenicity, and the nature of 
TSE diseases. The JRC will maintain flexibility to deal with new public health issues as they 
arise and will establish additional efforts in the area of microbiology. 

Standardisation of tests and evaluation of new methods for sensitive detection of BSE and 
TSE will involve the implementation of quality control of large scale post-mortem testing in 
abattoirs in collaboration with relevant DGs, TSE Ad-hoc Scientific Committee and leading 
TSE research laboratories. The JRC will investigate the fate of specific risk material 
(monitoring of food products for presence of central nervous tissue, recycling and safe 
handling of animal meal). Special emphasis will be put on safety aspects of animal feed being 
the prime route to the food chain. 

Food quality will grow in importance due to the relationship between health and food. Apart 
from assessment of compliance with labelling (detection of frauds and adulteration) there is a 
strong need to judge the efficacy and/or side effects of food supplements and functional food. 
The growing popularity of organic food requires the availability of suitable methods to assess 
authenticity. The JRC will focus its expertise in the area of food authenticity towards the 
emergence of “nutraceuticals” and their effectiveness. 

158



Technological prospective research will be conducted on the development of food products 
and processes, and on the impact of food safety policies on the agri-food sector. 

Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) 

Concerning the presence of GMOs in food and environment the JRC will provide 
considerable scientific and technical support in this field. This support will be carried out in 
the context of the European network of GMO laboratories, co-ordinated by JRC at the request 
of EU Member States. Tasks will include development and validation methods for GMO 
detection, identification and quantification, increasing the range of certified reference 
materials (new species, processed food), development of biomolecular databases, and 
training. Research activities (e.g. on sampling and traceability) focusing on novel varieties of 
food and feeds or on tackling the problem of species unauthorised for use in EU will be 
performed to underpin regulatory needs and to achieve pan European harmonisation. 

The study of GMOs in the environment will require the building of new competencies to deal 
with the genetic, biodiversity and agronomic aspects of introducing new organisms in the 
environment. 

Chemical products 

The new Community policy on chemicals will impact strongly on the support required of 
JRC63 throughout this Framework Programme. The role for JRC will encompass operating an 
expanded scheme to regulate chemicals; this will reinforce the already close links with 
relevant Member State authorities, industry and with international bodies e.g. OECD. The risk 
assessment experience and expertise of the ECB will also provide a solid foundation for 
significant research effort in this area. 

The validation of alternative methods will increase in importance in support of the new testing 
programme of the new chemicals policy. Research will also take place on the safety of 
vaccines and on the challenging area of the long-term effects of repeated low doses of 
potentially hazardous substances. 

Exchange of validated information through telematic means on health and medicines between 
regulatory bodies in EU Candidate Countries and diffusion to all user-groups including 
consumers and patients are pursued. 

The JRC will contribute to risk assessment on existing dangerous substances with attention 
paid to the migration of harmful compounds from materials in contact with human and food, 

e.g. plasticisers in toys and the harmful effects of cosmetics. Prospective analyses of the 
relations between Community policies and innovation and competitiveness of the European 
chemical industry will also be undertaken. 
Biomedical applications 

An ageing population will inevitably change the profile of demand on EU health systems. The 
JRC plans to apply its expertise in materials and life sciences on the biocompatibility and 
long-term reliability of implants and on the use of optical techniques in minimally invasive 
medical systems. This work necessitates networking with research laboratories, hospitals, 
industry and regulatory authorities. It will also work towards a globally accepted system for 

includes work of the European Chemicals Bureau (ECB) of the JRC. 

159



clinical diagnostic measurement in collaboration with the International Federation of Clinical 
Chemistry (Directives on In-Vitro-diagnostics and Medical Devices). 

JRC’s nuclear and isotopic facilities and competencies in the production and use of 
radioactive and stable isotopes will also be used for medical purposes as in new types of 
cancer therapies [-immunotherapy, Boron Neutron Capture Therapy (BNCT)] as well as in 
clinical reference materials. 

2.2 Environment and sustainability 
The quality and use of water, air and soils, the sustainable use of energy and the threat of 
global warming are concerns of growing political attention. Community policy developments 
in those fields call for adequate knowledge of causes, processes, impacts and trends. The JRC 
defines its programme in a manner which takes direct account of those requirements. It will 
thereby consolidate its role as a centre of knowledge and reference in environmental matters 
of significant European dimension. It will do so by becoming increasingly involved in 
reference networks with member states and internationally, particularly in the accession 
states. Service to the policy making process will be strengthened by developing a closer 
partnership with the relevant Commission Services and by pursuing cross-policy, technoeconomic prospective research. Attention will also be given to reinforcing the synergy with 
the European Environment Agency with particular attention to the diffusion of scientific 
results. The programme will cover the following areas: 

– assessing and preventing global change; 
– protection of the European environment (air, water and terrestrial resources); 
– contributions to sustainable development (new and renewable energies, 
environmental assessment) ; 
– support to GMES (Global Monitoring for Environment and Security). 
Assessing and preventing adverse global change 

The JRC will provide support to the development of EU’s strategy to combat global warming, 
making use of its combined technical, socio-economic, modelling and research skills. The 
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol necessitates the understanding of the causes and 
processes controlling greenhouse gas cycles. A priority for JRC will be the direct support of 
the EU Monitoring Mechanism of green house gases (Council decision 92/296). Closing gaps 
of knowledge by specific research contribution will be a critical part of the role of the JRC in 
this context. Work will focus on the establishment of a reference system which will enhance 
data quality and reduce uncertainty. A critical part of this is the monitoring of changes in land 
cover, land use and forestry at various scales (see also GMES). Energy scenarios for the 
future as well as carbon emission forecasts are also key to the implementation of relevant 
measures. Policy options to reduce emissions in a cost-effective way will also be investigated. 
To maximise its efforts, the JRC will conduct its global change activities in a dedicated 
cluster. Issues associated with climate policy implementation, carbon sequestration, 
atmospheric quality measurements, the dynamics of ozone and UV radiation over Europe 
could also be examined. 

Protection of the European environment 

-Preserving air quality 

160



Air pollution is a key concern for the European citizen and is also the focus of a large body of 
regulatory instruments (e.g. CAFE). The cornerstones of JRC’s efforts will be a) the 
assessment of emissions by vehicles and stationary sources (new emission directives, 
standards for diesel/gasoline, new fuels, particulate matter and dioxin emissions; 
harmonisation/standardisation of world-wide reference test cycles and of measuring methods 
for industrial emissions) and b) the provision of reference for the implementation and the 
development of air quality directives (analysis quantification of air pollution, monitoring, 
techniques, pre-normative work, methods for evaluating the impact of air quality policies on 
human exposure and modelling tools for data analysis and comparisons of abatement 
scenarios. 

Cross sectoral integrated analysis of the transport, energy, health and enterprise policies will 
be conducted to determine their effect on emissions and ambient pollution levels. The work 
will be conducted in the context of large networks of experts including representatives from 
the automotive and energy industries. 

-Water quality 

Water is a key resource issue of the future; maintaining natural water sources and securing 
good quality drinking water are of particular relevance. The Framework Directive on Water 
will oblige co-ordination and harmonisation of monitoring and reporting processes of all 
Community regulatory existing instruments during the next sic years. Research leading to the 
harmonisation of a common database on reports by Member States on implementation of 
various water related directives (e.g. Residual urban water, Nitrates, Surface water, etc.) will 
be pursued. JRC will focus on the determination of ecological water quality parameters (also 
in the context of supporting existing generic European metrological infrastructure), 
identification of significant pollutants, indicators of quality in inland and coastal waters and 
on the identification of microbiological hazards, especially in waste waters as well as on 
socio-economic implications of the new regulatory framework. Impacts on health are 
addressed under the "Food Safety and Quality" chapter of this programme. Integrated coastal 
zone management research will be pursued to provide community reference approaches. 

-Terrestrial resources 

The soils and the landscapes are the site of most human activities and their characteristics are 
determined by management practices. The environmental component of the agricultural 
policy as well as well as several pieces of EU legislation (e.g. Water Directive, Spatial 
Development Perspective, Urban Agenda, Climate Change and others) deal with a range of 
those issues. The JRC will provide support to the development of a common platform for 
integrated spatial analysis as a basis for policy making and evaluation. Catchment areas will 
be used as units of study for evaluating various processes and impacts. The extensive database 
managed by the European Soils Bureau will be expanded through networking; the ongoing 
collaboration with Eurostat will also be reinforced. Attention will be paid to the development 
of tools and to provide information on natural landscapes in the context of forestry, land use 
and biodiversity conservation. Support to the environmental component of the Common 
agricultural policy will be provided in terms of landscape analysis and use of indicators. 
Information on the state and changes in urban and regional environment will be produced. 
Work will rely upon the use of advanced remote sensing techniques, geographical information 
systems and modelling of spatial processes. 

Contributions to sustainable development 

161



Work on sustainable development pervades the whole JRC programme and attention is paid 
to the integration of economic, social and environmental dimensions. 

-Energy 

The Kyoto protocol has given a critical dimension to the energy debate since energy use and 
transport, two cornerstones of economic life, have major impacts on the emission of 
greenhouse gases. The importance of new and renewable energies as well as of energy 
efficiency and technology for the security of supply has been underlined in a recent Green 
Paper and in a Communication on “Renewables”. 

The JRC experience in the field of renewables, energy policy and energy technology will be 
exploited to provide support to emerging Community issues in a deregulated market; a 
concentration on the following areas of work is foreseen: 

– development of reference systems – through accredited laboratory and certification 
schemes -in renewable energy production (with priority on solar electricity), storage 
and energy use in buildings. 
– technology assessment, validation and modelling activities of new and conventional 
energy technologies with particular reference to safety, efficiency, waste and 
biomass generated power technologies and waste incineration performances. 
– energy scenarios and forecasting in the context of greenhouse gases emissions and 
market assessment for new and renewable energy technologies in a competitive 
energy economy. 
-Environmental assessment 

The need for an “integrated” assessment of environment quality is increasingly recognised. 
The JRC will support the EU Sustainable Development strategy through the development of 
appropriate integrated policy assessment tools and through activities leading to the integration 
of environmental concerns in EU policies. The European Integrated Pollution Prevention and 
Control Bureau (IPPC) will continue its directive-linked work on assessing best available 
technologies in view of reducing pollution in selected industrial sectors. Complex emission 
scenarios are needed to link air pollution and global change. Waste management is an 
important area where an integrated analysis from waste generation to treatment and disposal 
is necessary. Environmental integrity and human health is another area of integrated studies to 
which the JRC will contribute. New assessment tools and approaches to eco-toxicology will 
be developed to address topics such as air pollution and contaminants in waters (endocrine 
disrupters, biocides and pharmaceuticals). The JRC will also provide methodological support 
to the integration of the environmental dimension in development assistance. 

The JRC will contribute to the fulfilment of the EC legislation for exchanging environmental 
monitoring data (incl. radioactivity) and information (through model intercomparison) under 
routine and emergency conditions. 

A focus on inter-policy linkages and impacts will be retained by JRC as a specific 
contribution to the implementation of sustainable development practices at Community level. 

162



Support to GMES 

The need for independent information on key issues affecting the world’s environment and 
the security of the citizen is increasingly recognised. GMES is a European initiative towards 
the implementation of operational services for collecting, analysing and disseminating a range 
of information items related to changes in environmental quality, resource availability and 
management, natural risks and hazards. The GMES is being implemented under the dual 
concern of preserving the global environment and reducing or anticipating threats to the 
security of the citizen. It focuses primarily on the use of earth observation techniques for 
maintaining an adequate long-term watch on key landscape parameters (such as land cover, 
use, resource degradation or depletion etc.) at various geographical levels. It will also call for 
techniques to support the assessment of natural risks and the management of catastrophic 
events. The JRC will focus on the development of EU-policy relevant applications which feed 
into the GMES concept in three areas of work: support to international environmental 
agreements, assessing risks and hazards, and evaluating environmental stress. 

2.3 Technology foresight 
Increasingly, the definition of EU policies is dependent on the timely anticipation and 
understanding of developments in science and technology and the social and economic 
environment. JRC’s expertise in analysing inter-relationships between technology and 
society, and its experience in co-ordinating cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary foresight 
research on an international scale will contribute to the implementation of the objectives of 
the European Research Area (ERA). Throughout the framework programme 2002-2006, the 
JRC’s activities in this research area will be based on a close collaboration with DG RTD and 
other customer DGs. The activity will focus on: 

– Techno-economic foresight 
– International Foresight Co-operation forum 
Techno-economic foresight 

JRC will undertake medium to long-term prospective studies on crucial technological 
developments affecting the EU and the relevant impact on growth, sustainable development, 
employment, social cohesion and competitiveness. This activity will also provide background 
analysis and information that will be valuable in the implementation by the JRC of its work in 
its specific competence areas It will include prospective analysis to identify technological 
bottlenecks and opportunities, including quantitative estimations; identification of promising 
technologies and the conditions required for their uptake. 

International foresight co-operation forum 

The JRC will strengthen its working relationships with international think-tanks and top level 
advisors, by following up existing successful experiences (e.g. the European science and 
technology observatory (ESTO) network, the High-Level Economists Group) and by pursuing 
the establishment of an International foresight co-operation framework. The availability of a 
mechanism to share analysis on the main emerging challenges will in particular prove useful 
in promoting Europe's role in the international debate on science and governance. A common 
reference system in policy-oriented foresight analysis will be established in the context of 
regional exercises with particular attention to Candidate Countries. 

163



2.4 Reference materials and measurements 
Recognition of standards and measurements in products is an important component for the 
implementation of Community policies related to consumer safety, free trade, competitiveness 
of European industry and external relations. JRC will further support the existing or 
developing European metrological infrastructure to produce results of demonstrated quality, 
develop specific reference measurements, produce certified reference materials (CRMs) to 
improve their global acceptance, organise international measurement evaluation programmes 
and will establish trans-national databases in support to EU policies. Throughout JRC’s work 
programme agreed reference methods and materials are required, whether in environment, 
food safety, public health or the nuclear industry. In addition to work described in the 
previous sections , JRC plans to support the creation of a European Certified Reference 
Material system. This will put the Centre in position to provide sound advice to Commission 
services where applicable to EU legislation and practice. 

– BCR64and industrial certified reference materials 
– Metrology in chemistry 
BCR and certified reference materials 

This activity concerns developing concepts and techniques for the production and certification 
of reference materials to improve their global acceptance under the EU-US Mutual 
Recognition Agreement, where JRC advises DG TRADE. JRC will concentrate on production 
of BCRs and new CRMs for control of industrial processes and products. As support to DG 
RTD, JRC will, where feasible, extend its responsibility for storage and distribution of BCR 
to the management of the production and certification of new CRMs from indirect actions. 
Nuclear reference materials used for safeguards and nuclear materials accountancy will be 
expanded to the environment. 

Metrology in chemistry and physics 

The information generated by studying the interactions of neutrons with matter is 
fundamental to many applications areas. Infrastructures will be maintained to 
investigate basic metrology in physics in a systematic manner over a wide energy range, 
emphasising its relevance for training. The radionuclide metrology activity provides 
support to food, chemical and environmental safety. The JRC will continue to represent 
the Commission in international bodies responsible for the development of a world-wide 
chemical measurement system. Strategic tasks will include the development of primary 
measurement techniques, the production and certification of isotopic reference materials and 
organisation of International Measurement Evaluation Programmes. Topics depend on EU 
policy requirements and evaluations rely heavily on the participation of numerous 
laboratories, especially those which have a reference role to play in their sector or region. 
Through the establishment of networks (PECOMet-Network and MetMED) support will be 
provided to EU-Candidate countries and Mediterranean countries to build up a structured 
measurement system in chemistry. 

Bureau Communautaire de Référence 

164



2.5 Public security and anti-fraud 
Public security issues -proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the globalisation of the 
economy, infringements to privacy and Internet vulnerabilities, risks from natural or 
technological disasters -require a co-ordinated international approach. The EU is providing a 
framework through a number of mechanisms and at the same time it has declared zero 
tolerance to fraud. These political initiatives and commitments need scientific and technical 
support and the JRC is shaping its programme to directly answer some of those specific 
requirements. JRC has, over the years, developed a broad-based and well-recognised expertise 
in the general domain of security and anti-fraud, in the handling of large information 
infrastructures and in dealing with complex systems. In the framework programme 20022006, such expertise will be provided to user European institutions according to their 
priorities and needs. Increased emphasis will be given to exploiting networks with other 
research institutions and stakeholders in order to deepen and widen the support. JRC will 
concentrate on the following issues: 

– International humanitarian security 
– Natural and technological hazards, risks and emergencies 
– Cyber-security 
– Monitoring compliance with EU regulations and fraud control 
International humanitarian security 

The JRC will maintain a focus on technical aspects of EU efforts in humanitarian demining, 
firstly to improve knowledge of existing technology for minefield survey and detection 
through testing and benchmarking, secondly to assess new technologies, and thirdly to 
increase the visibility, transparency and efficiency of EU mine action operations. 

The JRC, through the GMES initiative, will also contribute to developing a European 
capability that allows integrated space-based data, environmental data and socio-economic 
data to be made available for European security policies, including humanitarian aid, on a 
timely basis. Based on its expertise in safeguarding nuclear materials, the JRC is prepared, if 
required, to deal with the technical issues raised in non-proliferation and disarmament of 
weapons of mass destruction. 

Natural and technological hazards, risks and emergencies 

JRC will continue to support efforts to develop a European framework for forecasting, 
assessing, managing and reducing risks in the Community. In the Framework Programme 
2002-2006 the JRC will further develop a system approach to the management of natural and 
technological hazards. For technological risks -from aircraft incidents and industrial hazards 
JRC's efforts will be centred round its operation and improvement of harmonised European 
monitoring systems (ECCAIRS65 MAHB66,EPERC67 which will be further extended to the 
enlargement countries. For natural hazards, JRC will endeavour to provide Europe with a 
similar capability. At the same time, efforts to develop a common European approach towards 

65 

European Coordination Centre for Aircraft mandatory accident Reporting Systems 

66 

Major Accidents Hazard Bureau 

67 

European Pressure Equipment Research Council 

165



floods and forest fires will continue through a focus on integration of advanced modelling, 
conventional and space-based data. A link to the GMES initiative will be developed. Various 
networks, such as the European network of earthquake engineering laboratories will be 
extended to international level. Similarly, JRC in collaboration with European partners will 
set up a network of experimental facilities to develop a common integrated initiative for 
structural safety. 

Cybersecurity 

The JRC will build on experience gained in supporting the EU's dependability initiative, out-
of-court dispute settlement systems as well as the observatory on electronic payment systems. 
Working closely with the responsible Commission Services and Member State organisations, 
it will support the development of an appropriate EU response to risks of cybercrime, privacy 
and Internet vulnerabilities. Efforts will concentrate on methods for better characterising these 
risks, on criteria for evaluating technical countermeasures and on testing them in JRC 
facilities and on developing appropriate and harmonised measures, indications and statistics in 
consultation with other interested parties, including Europol. The JRC will also maintain an 
Internet website on the issue of cybercrime and report its progress to the EU Forum 
established in the framework of the Commission Communication on ‘Creating a safer 
information society by improving the security of information infrastructures and combating 
computer-related crime’ [COM (2000)890 final]. 

Monitoring compliance with EU regulations and fraud control 

The JRC supports the Commission’s efforts to increase the effectiveness of anti-fraud 
measures, both by providing advanced technologies to bodies that operate at the EU level and 
by supporting Member States in the use of the latest technologies. The JRC, working closely 
with the concerned Commission services, will maintain appropriate support to the Common 
Agricultural Policy, the Common Fisheries Policy and the European Anti-Fraud Office, 
OLAF. As well as exploring the application of new technologies -DNA analysis for livestock 
identification, satellite image interpretation for crop acreage monitoring or fishing vessel 
identification, cross-correlation of isotopic analysis of beverages and foodstuffs to determine 
contents and origin, intelligence gathering from open sources, language technology to analyse 
multilingual documents – the JRC will continue to provide customers with the integrated 
knowledge that includes the entire cycle from data capture, data fusion, data mining through 
to visualisation and estimation. 

The JRC will also build on its methodological experience to provide timely, reliable and more 
socially-robust information to the policy process. This will be achieved for official statistics 
through the coordination, with Eurostat, of thematic research networks with emphasis on 
short-term indicators, business cycle and financial analysis and through the development of a 
quality assurance methodology for scientific input to governance. 

Increased importance will be devoted to early warnings and trend detection, dissemination, 
awareness raising and knowledge-sharing with partner laboratories in the Member States. The 
fraud problem will not be tackled on an individual case basis but at a system level 
developing procedures and regulations that involve less bureaucracy and that are intrinsically 
less prone to fraud. 

166



ANNEX II
INDICATIVE BREAKDOWN OF THE AMOUNT


Activity Amount (EUR million) 
Food, Chemical products and Health 
Environment and Sustainability 
Horizontal Activities 
– Technology Foresight; Reference 
Materials and Measurements; Public 
Security and Antifraud (222 M€) 
– Research Training; Access to 
Infrastructures (40 M€) 
207 212 M€ 
286 M€ 
222 262 M€ 
Total 715 760 M€ 68 69 

68 

Of which approximately 6% may be allocated to exploratory research and up to 2% for exploitation of 
own JRC results and technology transfer. 

69 

This total includes the JRC’s budget contribution necessary for its participation in indirect actions. 

167 


ANNEX III 

SPECIFIC RULES FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAMME 

1. The Commission, after consulting the Board of Governors of the JRC, shall 
implement the direct action on the basis of the scientific objectives and contents 
described in Annex I. The activities relating to this action shall be performed in the 
relevant institutes of the Joint Research Centre (JRC). 
2. In the implementation of its activities, the JRC will, whenever appropriate and 
feasible, participate in or organise networks of public and private laboratories in the 
Member States or European research consortia supporting the European policy 
making process. Particular attention shall be paid to co-operation with industry, 
especially with small and medium-sized enterprises. Research bodies established in 
third countries may also co-operate on projects, in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of Article 6 of the Framework Programme and, where applicable, of 
agreements for scientific and technological co-operation between the Community 
and the third countries concerned. Particular attention will be paid to co-operation 
with research laboratories and institutes in the Candidate Countries and countries of 
Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. 
It will also use appropriate mechanisms to continuously identify the requirements 
and needs of its customers and users and to involve them in the related activities. 

The knowledge gained through implementation of the projects will be disseminated 
by the JRC itself (taking into account possible limitations due to confidentiality 
issues). 

3. The accompanying measures shall include: 
– organisation of the visits of JRC staff to national laboratories, industrial 
laboratories and universities, 

– the promotion of mobility of young scientists, particularly from the Candidate 
countries, with particular attention to encourage participation of women, 
– specialised training in support of the elaboration and/or implementation of the 
European policies with the emphasis on multidisciplinarity, 
– the organisation of visits to JRC institutes of visiting scientists and seconded 
national experts, particularly from Candidate countries, with particular 
attention to encourage participation of women 
– systematic exchange of information, through, inter alia, the organisation of 
scientific seminars, workshops and colloquiums and scientific publications, 
– the independent scientific and strategic evaluation of the performance of the 
projects and programmes. 
168



FINANCIAL STATEMENT


Policy area(s): RESEARCH
Activity(ies): Direct Action


TITLE OF ACTION: 

PROPOSAL FOR A COUNCIL DECISION ADOPTING A SPECIFIC PROGRAMME 2002-2006 FOR 
RESEARCH, TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION AIMED AT CONTRIBUTING 
TO THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA TO BE CARRIED OUT BY MEANS OF DIRECT ACTIONS BY 
THE JOINT RESEARCH CENTRE 

1. BUDGET LINE(S) + HEADING(S) 
B6-111: Persons associated with the institution 
B6-121: Resources 
B6-2: Direct Operating Appropriations – Scientific and Technical support to 

Community policies – EC framework programme (2002 TO 2006) 

2. OVERALL FIGURES 
2.1 Total allocation for action (Part B): 715 760 € million for commitment 
2.2 Period of application: 
2002 to 2006 

2.3 Overall multiannual estimate on expenditure: 
a) Schedule of commitment appropriations/payment appropriations (financial intervention) (see 
point 6.1.1) 

€ million (to 3rd decimal place) 

Years 
2002 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 
and 
subs. 
Years 
Total 
Commitments 
Payments 

b) Technical and administrative assistance and support expenditure(see point 6.1.2) 

Commitments 
Payments 

169



Subtotal a+b 
Commitments 
Payments 

c) Overall financial impact of human resources and other administrative expenditure 

(see points 7.2 and 7.3) 

Commitments 175.7 177.6 179.6 182.1 715 
185.0 188.2 191.4 195.4 760 
Payments 146.2 167.9 178.2 222.6 715 
152.5 178.3 190.8 238.4 760 

TOTAL a+b+c 
Commitments 175.7 177.6 179.6 182.1 715 
185.0 188.2 191.4 195.4 760 
Payments 146.2 167.9 178.2 222.6 715 
152.5 178.3 190.8 238.4 760 

2.4 Compatibility with the financial programming and the financial perspective 
. Proposal compatible with the existing financial programming 
. This proposal will entail reprogramming of the relevant heading in the financial 
perspective. 
. This may entail application of the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement. 
2.5 Financial impact on revenue70: 
. No financial implications (involves technical aspects regarding implementation of 
a measure) 
OR 

. Financial impact – the effect on revenue is as follows: 
€ million (to 1 decimal place) 
Budget line Revenue 
Prior to 
action 
(Year 
n-1) Year n 
Situation following action 
n+1 n+2 n+3 n+4 n+5 
a) Revenue in absolute terms 
b) Change in Revenue D 

For further information see a separate guidance paper 

170



3. BUDGET CHARACTERISTICS
Type of expenditure New EFTA 
participation 
Participation 
applicant 
countries 
Heading 
Financial 
Perspective 
Non-comp Diff YES YES YES N° 3 

4. LEGAL BASIS 
Article 166 of the EC Treaty. 

Decision …/../EC of the European Parliament and the Council adopting the framework 
programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technology development and 
demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research 
Area (OJ n° …). 

5. DESCRIPTION AND GROUNDS 
5.1 Need for Community intervention 71 
5.1.1 Objectives pursued 
The Joint Research Centre’s mission is to provide customer-driven scientific and 
technical support for the conception, implementation and monitoring of European 
Union policies. The JRC serves the common interest of the Member States while being 
independent of special interests, private or national, and as such provides support when 
there is a need for European intervention. 

The JRC programme addresses key areas of policy concern where it has specific 
competence to offer. Its non-nuclear activities are concentrated into two main themes 
“Food, Chemical Products and Health” and “Environment and Sustainability” which are 
reinforced by horizontal areas of expertise (“Technology foresight”, “Reference 
materials and measurements” and “Public Security and Antifraud”). A recurrent thread 
in the programme is the attention to safety and security issues. This includes risk 
assessment, testing, validation and refinement of methods, materials and technologies to 
support a range of policies. 

For a more efficient response to policy needs, the JRC will extend its networking 
activities in a more strategic manner to create a broad knowledge. In the spirit of ERA, 
it will closely link with a wide range of partners from within the EU (European agencies 
or organisations, national authorities) and beyond to contribute significantly to the 
establishment of a common scientific reference system in its areas of competence. 
These networks will be dedicated to the provision of scientific services (early alert, 
anticipation, quick response, validation and integration of knowledge, interfacing with 
stakeholders and policy makers) and products (databases, common standards, validation 
methods, etc). 

A strengthened user-orientation to deliver scientific and technical support throughout 
the policy cycle will be ensured throughout the programme life; an inter-service users 

For further information see a separate guidance paper 

171



group with high-level representation from the Commission Services will be set-up to 
ensure priority setting and the allocation of resources according to policy needs. 

5.1.2 Measures taken in connection with evaluation 
The JRC programme is being regularly reviewed through scientific audits and the 5year-assessments. Annual programme presentations to the other services of the 
Commission are organised. A high level user group composed by representative of 
customer Commission’s DGs has been set up in view of establishing and reviewing 
priorities in close connection with policy needs. 

The Scientific Audit of the JRC Institutes, launched in 1999, was designed to provide an 
early advice and feedback to the JRC management on the scientific standing of the 
institutes, and an assessment of their scientific strengths and weaknesses, both in terms 
of staff and other resources, for the implementation of the new programme. The chief 
objective was to ensure that the FP5 execution could be performed with the requisite 
scientific quality. The Scientific Audit’s overall conclusions confirmed the soundness of 
JRC’s scientific strategies and the validity of its new mission. 

The 5-Year-Assessment (5YA) exercise, input required by legislation before the tabling 
by the Commission of proposals for the Sixth RTD Framework Programme, was carried 
out in 2000. Given that scientific issues had already been addressed in the Scientific 
Audit, the main focus of the 5YA was the management aspects of the JRC activities, the 
impact of the JRC support to the EU policies, and the delivered results in relation to the 
adopted programmes. The resulting recommendations were dominated by the overriding 
statement that the new mission of the JRC must be maintained and its implementation 
assured in all aspects and consequences. 

In January 2000 Research Commissioner Philippe Busquin established a High Level 
Panel chaired by Viscount Etienne Davignon, with the task to review and to make 
recommendations on the workings of the JRC. The Davignon Report was issued in July 
2000. The High Level Panel endorses the mission assigned to the JRC by the 5th RTD 
Framework Programme and finds that it has a clear long-term role. It proposes opening 
it up to the other Community institutions and contains a number of organisational 
suggestions. It recommends that the JRC should not dissipate its efforts but should do 
more to focus its activities, promote intense networking with other European centres of 
excellence and finally, it attaches particular importance to nuclear activities. 

Finally, in July 2000 the Commission’s Peer Group, appointed earlier in the year to 
make a political overview of the Institution’s activities and bring them in line with the 
human resources it had available, published a report in which a series of actions were 
identified. 

In response to the various evaluations, the JRC has undertaken a strategy for 
concentrating its activities into some core competence areas and has identified possible 
reduction of activities across its structure with the launch of an Activity Prioritisation 
Audit, the results of which have been published internally on April 2, 2001. An 
interservice consultation has taken place in view of a Communication to the 
Commission that should disseminate the results of this evaluation to the rest of the 
Commission services. 

172



5.2 Actions envisaged 
– Food, chemical products and health 
In FP 2002-2006, the JRC will become a scientific reference and validation centre in 
selected areas linked to the quality and safety of food, the safety of chemical products 
including the operation of appropriate data bases. JRC’s strategy relies heavily on 
extensive networking with laboratories in the Member States, on the maintenance of 
advanced analytical facilities and reference material production and on expanded 
competencies in life sciences including proteomics and bioinformatics. Services like 
information systems, data banks (e.g. molecular register) will be provided in support to 
relevant EU policies. Given the novelty of many issues and the complexity of the 
regulatory environment, training will also be a priority. 

Work will focus on the following priorities: food safety & quality, genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs), chemical products and biomedical applications. 

– Environment and sustainability 
The quality and use of water, air and soils, the sustainable use of energy and the threat 
of global warming are concerns of growing political attention. The JRC will consolidate 
its role as a centre of knowledge and reference in environmental matters of European 
dimension. It will establish reference networks with member states and internationally, 
particularly in the accession states. It will work in synergy with the European 
Environment Agency in view of a better exploitation and diffusion of research results. 
The JRC also functions as a reference laboratory in environmental measurements as in 
emissions from motor vehicles, air and water quality; it produces the assessment needed 
for identifying best available technologies in integrated pollution prevention and 
control. 

The programme will cover the following areas: assessing and preventing global 
change, protection of the European environment (air, water and terrestrial 
resources), technologies for sustainable development (renewable energy, integrated 
environmental assessment), technical support to GMES (Global monitoring for 
environment and security). 

These two core activities will be supported by a set of horizontal competencies: 

– Reference materials and measurements 
Recognition of standards is a key component for the implementation of Community 
policies related to consumer safety, free trade, competitiveness of European industry 
and external relations. JRC will further develop specific reference measurements, 
produce certified reference materials (CRMs) to improve their global acceptance, 
organise international measurement evaluation programmes and will establish transnational databases in support to EU policies related to environment, food safety and 
public health and for the nuclear industry. The focus will be on: Bureau 
Communautaire de References and the production of industrial certified reference 
materials, metrology in chemistry. 

– Public security and anti-fraud 
Public security issues require a co-ordinated international approach; questions related 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the globalisation of the economy, 
infringements to privacy and Internet vulnerabilities, risks from natural or technological 

173



disasters are often transboundary issues. The EU is setting a high priority on the fight 
against fraud and has declared a “zero tolerance” policy. The JRC has a well-recognised 
expertise in the general domain of security and anti-fraud, in the handling of large 
information infrastructures and in dealing with complex systems. This expertise will be 
provided to European institutions with increased emphasis on the development of 
networks with other research institutions and stakeholders. 

JRC will concentrate on the following crosscutting issues: international security, 
natural and technological hazards, risks and emergencies, cyber-security, 
accounting and control. 

– Technology foresight 
JRC’s expertise in analysing inter-relationships between technology and society, and its 
experience in co-ordinating cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary foresight research on an 
international scale will contribute to the development of EU policies and to the 
implementation of the objectives of the European Research Area (ERA). Throughout 
the next Framework programme, the JRC’s activities in this research area will be linked 
with national foresight programmes and in close collaboration with the DG RTD and 
other customer DGs. 

The activity will focus on techno-economic foresight, socio-economic studies in 
support to EU policies, quality of socio-economic information, international 
foresight co-operation forum. 

5.3 Methods of implementation 
Direct action of the framework programme 2002-2006 managed and conducted by 
Commission staff. 

6. FINANCIAL IMPACT 
6.1 Total financial impact on Part B -(over the entire programming period) 
(The method of calculating the total amounts set out in the table below must be explained by the 
breakdown in Table 6.2.) 

6.1.1 Financial intervention 
Commitments in € million (to the 3rd decimal place) 

Breakdown 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 and 
subs. 
years 
Total 
Food, Chemical Products 50.867 51.417 51.996 52.720 207.000 
and Health 
51.600 52.500 53.400 54.500 212.000 
Environment and sustainable 70.280 71.040 71.840 72.840 286.000 
development 
69.600 70.800 72.000 73.600 
Horizontal Activities 54.553 55.143 55.764 56.540 222.000 
63.800 64.900 66.000 67.300 262.000 
TOTAL 
175.700 177.600 179.600 182.100 715.000 
185.000 188.200 191.400 195.400 760.000 

174



6.1.2 Technical and administrative assistance, support expenditure and IT expenditure 
(Commitment appropriations) 
Year N N +1 N + 2 N +3 N + 4 N +5 and 
subs. 
years 
Total 
1) Technical and 
administrative assistance 
a) Technical assistance 
offices 
b) Other technical and 
administrative assistance: 
-intra muros : 
-extra muros : 
of which for construction 
and maintenance of 
computerised management 
systems 
Subtotal 1 
2) Support expenditure 
a) Studies 
b) Meetings of experts 
c) Information and 
publications 
Subtotal 2 
TOTAL 

175



6.2 Calculation of costs by measure envisaged in Part B (over the entire 
programming period)72 
(Where there is more than one action, give sufficient detail of the specific measures to be 
taken for each one to allow the volume and costs of the outputs to be estimated). 

Commitments in € million (to the 3rd decimal place) 

Breakdown Type 
of outputs 
(projects, files ) 
Number of 
outputs 
(total for years 
1…n) 
Average unit 
cost 
Total cost 
(total for years 
1…n) 
1 2 3 4=(2X3) 
Food, Chemical products and 
Health 
Environment and Sustainable 
Development 
Horizontal Activities 
-Scientific and Technological 
Perspective 
-Reference Materials and 
Measures 
-Public Security and Anti-fraud. 
TOTAL COST 
760.000 
715.000 

If necessary explain the method of calculation 

7. IMPACT ON STAFF AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE 
7.1 Impact on human resources 
Types of post 
Staff to be assigned to management of the 
action using existing and/or additional 
resources Total 
Description of tasks deriving from the 
action 
Number of 
permanent posts 
Number of 
temporary posts 
Permanent 
officials or 
Temporary staff 
A 
B 
C 
D 
733 
595 
537 
37 
If necessary, a fuller description of the 
tasks may be annexed. 
Other human resources NDE, Grantholders, 
Visiting Scientists, … 
Total 1.902 

In 2002, the JRC will have a single staff table of 1,902 posts distributed as follows: 733 Aposts, 595 B-posts, 537 C-posts and 37 D-posts73. The staff is managed as a single group: staff 
For further information see a separate guidance paper 
176 


can be put allocated to both nuclear and non-nuclear activities. The ratio of non-nuclear to 
total staff is variable during the period of execution of the framework programme. This ratio 
is of the order of 2/3. A relatively large number of short-term scientific posts are also financed 
as non-statutory staff (about 200). Their status can be grantholders, scientific visitors, national 
experts on secondment… 

7.2 Overall financial impact of human resources 
Type of human resources 
Amount EUR 
millions 
Method of calculation * 
Officials 
Temporary staff 
Other human resources 
(give budget line) 
Total 116.3 123 

The amounts are total expenditure for twelve months. 

The different resources: staff, material, specific credits are distributed to remain within the 
given envelope. The staff credits have been allocated after taking the minimum needs for 
infrastructure into account and deciding on a minimum level of specific credits for the 
execution of projects and for networking. The staff budget is reduced compared to that of the 
fifth framework programme 1998-2002 and a significant staff reduction (150 posts) is 
necessary. This reduction will depend on the evolution of salaries during the period 20032006 and of the evolution of the required competencies: ratio between A/B/C/D staff. 

7.3 Other administrative expenditure deriving from the action 
Budget line 
(number and heading) 
Amount € Method of calculation 
Overall allocation (Title A7) 
A0701 – Missions 
A07030 – Meetings 
A07031 – Compulsory committees (1) 
A07032 – Non-compulsory committees (1) 
A07040 – Conferences 
A0705 – Studies and consultations 
… Other expenditure (state which) 
Information systems (A-5001/A-4300) 
Other expenditure -Part A (state which) 
Total 

The amounts are total expenditure for twelve months. 

This compares with the current (2001) staff table of 2080 1902 posts. As in the past this envelope of 
statutory posts constitutes a separate staff table and represents the maximum statutory staff which may 
be engaged. However the number of staff employed in practice depends on the availability of financial 
resources (institutional credits, competitive income and other possible sources of revenue). 

177 


(1) Specify the type of committee and the group to which it belongs. 
I. Annual total (7.2 + 7.3) € 
II. Duration of action Years 
III. Total cost of action (I x II) € 

(In the estimate of human and administrative resources required for the action, DGs/Services 
must take into account the decisions taken by the Commission in its orientation debate and 
when adopting the preliminary draft budget (PDB). This means that DGs must show that 
human resources can be covered by the indicative pre-allocation made when the PDB was 
adopted. 

Exceptional cases, where the action concerned could not be foreseen when the PDB was 
being prepared, will have to be referred to the Commission for a decision on whether and 
how (by means of an amendment of the indicative pre-allocation, an ad hoc redeployment 
exercise, a supplementary/amending budget or a letter of amendment to the draft budget) 
implementation of the proposed action can be accepted.) 

8. FOLLOW-UP AND EVALUATION 
Each year, with the help of appropriately qualified independent experts, the Commission will 
examine the implementation of specific programme 2002-2006. It will, in particular, assess 
whether the objectives, priorities and financial resources are still appropriate to the changing 
situation. Where appropriate, it will submit proposals to adapt or supplement the specific 
programme 2002-2006. 

The Commission produces an annual report on the activities of the Joint Research Centre. 
These reports are sent to the European Parliament, the Council and the Economic and Social 
Committee. 

9. ANTI-FRAUD MEASURES 
When the implementation of the programme calls for the use of external contractors or 
implies granting financial contributions to third parties, the Commission will carry out, where 
appropriate, financial audits, in particular if it has reasons to doubt the realistic nature of work 
performed or described in the activity reports. 

The Community's financial audits will be carried out either by its own staff or by accounting 
experts approved according to the law of the audited party. The Community will chose the 
latter freely, while avoiding any risks of conflicts of interest which might be indicated to it by 
the party subject to the audit. 

In addition, the Commission will make sure in carrying out the research activities, that the 
financial interests of the European Communities are protected by effective checks and, in case 
of detected irregularities, measures as well as deterrent and proportionate sanctions. 

In order to achieve this aim, rules on checks, measures and sanctions, with references to the 
Regulations No 2988/95,02185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 will be taken up in all contracts used 
in the implementation of the programme. 

In particular, the following points will have to be provided for in the contracts : 

178



– the introduction of specific contractual clauses to protect the financial interests of the 
EC in carrying out checks and controls in relation to the work performed; 

– the participation of administrative checks in the field of fraud-fighting, in accordance 
with Regulations No 2185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 ; 
– the application of administrative sanctions for all intentional or negligent 
irregularities in the implementation of the contracts, in accordance with the 
framework Regulation No 2988/95, including a black listing mechanism ; 
– the fact that possible recovery orders in case of irregularities and fraud be 
enforceable according to Article 256 of the EC Treaty. 
In addition and as routine measures, an internal audit and control programme in respect of 
scientific and budgetary aspects, will be carried out by the JRC staff responsible; internal 
audit carried out by the JRC Internal audit Unit; and local inspections by this Unit and the 
Court of Auditors. 

179



Amended proposal for a
COUNCIL DECISION


adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 (Euratom) 

for research and training on
nuclear energy
(2002-2006)


180



2001/0125 (CNS) 

Amended proposal for a 

COUNCIL DECISION 

adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 (Euratom)
for research and training on
nuclear energy


(2002-2006) 

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, and in 
particular the first paragraph of Article 7 thereof, 

Having regard to the proposal from the Commission74 

Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament75 

Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee76 

Whereas: 

(1) By Decision No. …/../Euratom77 the Council adopted the sixth multiannual 
framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community for 
research and training activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the 
European Research Area (hereinafter referred to as “the framework programme") to be 
implemented by means of research and training programme(s) drawn up in accordance 
with Article 7 of the Treaty, which define the detailed rules for their implementation, 
fix their duration and provide for the means deemed necessary. 
(2) The rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities for the 
implementation of the framework programme, adopted by the Council in Decision No. 
…/../Euratom78 (hereinafter referred to as "the rules for participation") should apply to 
this programme. 
(3) The Commission’s administrative expenditure for the implementation of this 
programme reflects the high number of staff seconded to laboratories in the members 
States and to the ITER project. 
74 

OJ 

75 

OJ 

76 

OJ 

77 

OJ 

78 

OJ 

181



(4) This programme is open to the participation of countries having concluded the 
necessary agreements to this effect, and is also, except in the case of fusion 
research, open on the project level, and on the basis of mutual benefit, to the 
participation of entities from third countries and of international organisations 
for scientific co-operation. 
(5) In implementing this programme, emphasis should be given to promoting mobility of 
researchers, and innovation, in the Community as well as international co-operation 
activities with third countries and international organisations. Special attention should 
be paid to the Accession candidate countries. 
(6) Research activities carried out within this programme should respect fundamental 
ethical principles, including those reflected in Article 6 of the Treaty on the European 
Union and notably those which appear in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the 
European Union, as well as the need to take into account public acceptability of 
these activities. 
(7) Following the Commission Communication “Women and Science”79 and the 
Resolution of the Council80 and the European Parliament81 on this theme, an action 
plan is being implemented in order to reinforce and increase the place and role of 
women in science and research, which should ensure the respect of equality of 
opportunity, irrespective of gender. 
(8) This programme should be implemented in a flexible, efficient and transparent 
manner, taking account of relevant interests, in particular of the scientific, industrial, 
user and policy communities. The research activities carried out under it should be 
adapted where appropriate to the needs of Community policies and to scientific and 
technological developments. 
(9) Participation in the activities of this programme will be encouraged through 
publication of the necessary information on content, conditions and procedures, 
to be made available in a timely and thorough manner to potential participants, 
including those from the associated candidate countries and other associated 
countries. 
(10) The Commission should will in due course arrange for an independent assessment to 
be conducted concerning the activities carried out in the fields covered by this 
programme, which will be done in a spirit of openness with respect to all the 
relevant actors. 
(11) The Scientific and Technical Committee has been consulted. 
79 

COM (1999) 76 

80 

Resolution of 20 May 1999, OJ C 201, 16.7.1999 

81 

Resolution of 3 February 2000, PE 284.656 

182



HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION 

Article 1 

1. In accordance with the sixth framework programme, a specific programme for 
research and training on nuclear energy (hereinafter referred to as "the specific 
programme") is hereby adopted for the period from […..] to 31 December 2006. 
2. The objectives and scientific and technological priorities for the specific programme 
are set out in Annex I. 
Article 2 

In accordance with Annex II to the framework programme], the amount deemed necessary for 
the execution of the specific programme is EUR 900 940 million, including a maximum of 
16.5% for the Commission’s administrative expenditure. An indicative breakdown of this 
amount is given in Annex II to this decision. 

Article 3 

All research activities carried out under the specific programme shall be carried out in 
compliance with fundamental ethical principles. 

Article 34 

1. The detailed rules for financial participation by the Community in the specific 
programme shall be those referred to in Article 2, (2) of the framework programme. 
2. The specific programme shall be implemented by means of instruments defined in 
Annex III. 
3. The rules for participation shall apply to the specific programme. 
Article 45 

1. The Commission shall draw up a work programme for the implementation of the 
specific programme, setting out in greater detail the objectives and scientific and 
technological priorities set out in Annex I, including the instruments to be used on 
aprioritybasis, and the timetable for implementation. 
2. The work programme shall take account of relevant research activities carried out by 
the Member States, Associated States, European and international organisations. It 
shall be updated where appropriate, including in relation to the use of instruments 
on a priority basis. 
183



Article 56 

1. The Commission shall be responsible for the implementation of the specific 
programme. 
2. For the purposes of implementing the specific programme the Commission shall be 
assisted by a consultative committee. The members of this committee can vary 
according to the different subjects on the committee’s agenda. For fission-related 
aspects, the composition of this committee and the detailed operational rules and 
procedures applicable to it shall be as laid down in Council Decision 
84/338/Euratom, ECSC, EEC82 dealing with management and co-ordination advisory 
committees. For the fusion-related aspects they shall be as laid down in the Council 
Decision of 16 December 1980 dealing with the consultative committee for the 
fusion programme. 
Article 67 

1. The Commission shall regularly report on the overall progress of the implementation 
of the specific programme, in accordance with Article 5(2) of the framework 
programme, information on financial aspects shall be included. 
2. The Commission shall arrange for the independent monitoring and assessment 
provided for in Articles 5 and 6 of the framework programme to be conducted 
concerning the activities carried out in the fields covered by the specific programme. 
Article 78 

This decision is addressed to the Member States. 

Done at Brussels, 

For the Council 
The President 

OJ L 177, 4.7.1984, p.25. 

184



ANNEX I 

Scientific and technological objectives and broad lines of the 
activities 

1. INTRODUCTION 
As the source of 35% of the electricity produced in the European Union, nuclear energy is an 
element of the debate on how to combat climate change and reduce the energy dependency of 
the EU. But significant challenges need to be faced. Controlled thermonuclear fusion is one of 
the long term options for energy supply, in particular for the centralised supply of base-load 
electricity. The priority is to make progress towards demonstrating the scientific and 
technological feasibility of fusion energy and assessing its sustainable qualities. In the short 
term, ways of dealing with nuclear waste that are acceptable to society need to be found, and 
more particularly the implementation of technical solutions for the management of long-lived 
waste. Innovative concepts for the safer exploitation of nuclear fission should also be studied 
as possible contributions to meeting European energy needs in the decades ahead. The high 
standards of radiation protection in the Community must be maintained through 
focused and co-ordinated research, in particular into the effects of low levels of 
exposure. 

Co-operation at European level, including the exchange of scientists and common research 
programmes, is already well established in this field. In respect of nuclear waste, radiation 
protection and other activities, this will be intensified and deepened at programme and 
project level in order to make with the aim of better use of resources (both human resources 
and experimental facilities) and promoteing a common European view on key problems and 
approaches, in accordance with the needs of the European research area. Links will be 
established with national programmes and networking will be promoted with third countries, 
in particular, USA, the Newly Independent States of the Former Soviet Union (NIS), 
Canada and Japan. In the case of fusion, the Community and, the Member States and 
Countries Associated with the activities covered by the Euratom Framework 
Programme will continue to work within the framework of an integrated programme of 
activities. 

Co-ordination will be assured with the JRC programme on “nuclear safety and safeguards”. 

2. PRIORITY THEMATIC AREAS 
2.1 Fusion energy research 
Objectives 

Fusion energy could contribute in the second half of the century to the emission-free largescale production of base-load electricity. The advances made in fusion energy research justify 
to further pursue a vigorous effort towards the long-term objective of a fusion power plant. 
Theoretical work and experimental studies on the existing devices world-wide, in particular 
on JET, have established the scientific and technical readiness for the construction of a project 
of the next generation after JET with the objective of demonstrating the scientific and 
technological feasibility of fusion energy. World wide collaboration on fusion energy research 
has progressedtothe detailedengineeringdesign of sucha Next Step device, ITER, withthe 

185



objectives of extended burn in inductive operation with power amplification Q >10, 
demonstrating generation of 400 MW of fusion power over about 400 seconds, that could 
allow burning plasmas to be studied in conditions relevant to energy production. 

The successful completion of the ITER Engineering Design Activities makes it possible, in 
line with the reactor orientation of the Community activities on fusion energy research, to 
take a decision about the realisation of the Next Step. Subject to a positive outcome of the 
international negotiations on the juridical and institutional conditions of the establishment of 
an ITER Legal Entity and negotiations for its joint implementation (construction, operation, 
exploitation and decommissioning), a specific decision could be sought in the period 20032004, so that construction could effectively start during the period 2005-2006. The period 
2003-2006 has therefore to be seen as a transition period marked by the need to rationalise 
European activities due to the strong orientation of the programme towards the Next Step. 
The budgetary proposition for research in the field of fusion energy over the period 20032006 provides that out of a total appropriation of 700 750 Mio€, up to a maximum of 200 
Mio€ are is foreseen for the realisation of ITER. 

If and when decided, the realisation of the Next Step will mobilise significant human and 
financial resources. Once a decision is taken to go ahead with the project, adaptations to the 
current efforts of the European partners of Euratom in the field of fusion and organisational 
changes will be required, in particular to jointly steer the European contribution to ITER. The 
amount of 500 550 Mio€ is proposed to allow the continuation of a meaningful R&D 
programme, including the transition between the activities currently carried out in the 
framework of the Associations83 and JET, and what would become the "accompanying 
programme" in physics and technology for fusion once construction of the Next Step/ITER 
device has reached its steady state after 2006. 

Priorities 

i) Associations' programme in physics and technology 

The Associations' programme will include: 

– R&D in fusion physics and plasma engineering, focusing on the study and 
evaluation of magnetic confinement formulas, with in particular the continuation of 
the construction of the Wendelstein 7-X “stellarator” and operation of the existing 
installations in the Euratom Associations. 
– Structured R&D activities in fusion technology in particular research on fusion 
materials and participation in the R&D activities for the decommissioning of JET, 
which is foreseen at the end of its operations 
– Investigations of socio-economic aspects, focusing on evaluation of economic costs 
and social acceptability of fusion energy, in complement to the further studies on 
safety and environmental aspects; co-ordination, in the context of a keep-in-touch 
activity, of the Member States’ civil research activities on inertial confinement and 
possible alternative concepts; dissemination of results and the diffusion of 
information to the public; mobility and training. 
Established under contracts of associations between the Community and entities in the Members States. 

186



In contributing to the Associations' programme, priority will be given to multilateral actions 
to focalise activities on common projects such as those directly related to operation on JET 
and to the Next Step / ITER and/or staff training. Depending on a decision on the realisation 
of ITER and its timing, the current Community support to the Associations activities will be 
adjusted, and the phasing out of the exploitation of a number of facilities will be considered. 
Adequate means shall be ensured to maintain a strong European co-ordination of the fusion 
activities, which has demonstrated its usefulness over the years. 

The extent of the accompanying domestic programme in fusion physics and technology which 
is required in the Associations and European industry to take full benefit from ITER, will 
depend (a) on the level of the European share in ITER and (b) on where would be sited. This 
could entail investments aiming at maintaining experimentation on fusion devices at worldclass level in Europe beyond the start of operation of ITER and an adequate programme of 
technological development. 

ii) Exploitation of the JET facilities 

The JET facilities will continue to be exploited in the framework of the European Fusion 
Development Agreement (EFDA), in view of completing the exploitation of the performance 
enhancements currently under way. The use of the JET facilities will have to be suspended at 
an appropriate time to enable the corresponding resources to be redirected to the Next Step / 
ITER. 

iii) Next Step / ITER 

The Proposal for the Euratom framework programme (2002-2006) includes the continuation 
of Next Step activities with a view to participate in its construction in the second half of the 
period. However, since decisions on ITER do not depend only upon EU Institutions but also 
on the EU international partners, the proposed programme of activities must be open 
regarding the eventual siting and framework of the Next Step / ITER and the precise content 
of the accompanying domestic programme. The studies performed in preparation of 
possible European site(s) will be completed. 

The EU participation in ITER would include contributions to the construction of equipment 
and installations, which are within the perimeter of the ITER site and necessary for its 
exploitation, as well as to the costs associated with the staffing and management of, and the 
support to be given to, the project during construction. The level and nature of this 
participation will depend on the outcome of the negotiations with the EU international 
partners, and in turn on the location of the ITER site. If ITER was located in Europe, the EU 
participation would also include contribution to the costs to be borne by Europe as a Host 
Party. 

2.2 Treatment and disposal Management of radioactive waste 
Objectives 

The absence of a broadly agreed approach to waste management and disposal is one of the 
main impediments to the continued and future use of nuclear energy. In particular, this applies 
to the disposal of long-lived waste components in geological repositories, which will be 
required no matter what treatment method is chosen for the spent fuel and high level waste. 
Research alone cannot ensure societal acceptance; however, it is needed in order to develop 
and test the repository technologies, investigate suitable sites, promote basic scientific 

187



understanding relating to safety and safety assessment methods, and to develop decision 
processes that are perceived as fair and equitable by the stakeholders involved. 

Research is also needed to explore the technical and economic potential offered by of new 
concepts for nuclear energy generation able toreactor types and/or fuel cycles to make 
better use of fissile material and generate less waste, while meeting appropriate cost 
expectations, and of to clarify the prospects for conducting partitioning and transmutation, 
which have a theoretical potential to reduce the hazard of the waste, on an industrial scale 
with adequate safety and at reasonable cost. 

Research Priorities 

i) Research on geological disposal 

The aims are to establish a sound technical basis for demonstrating the safety of disposing 
spent fuel and high level long lived radioactive wastes in geological formations and underpin 
the development of a common European view on the main issues related to the disposal of 
waste. 

– Improvement of fundamental knowledge, developing and testing technologies: 
research will focus on key physical, chemical and biological processes; interaction 
between the different natural and engineered barriers, their long-term stability and 
means of implementing disposal technologies in underground research laboratories. 
– New and improved tools: research will focus on models for performance, and safety 
assessment, and methodologies to demonstrate long term safety, including sensitivity 
and uncertainty analyses, and development and evaluation of alternative measures 
of performance and of better governance processes that properly address to the 
public concerns on waste disposal. 
ii) Partitioning and transmutation and other reactor concepts to produce less waste in 
nuclear energy generation 

The aims are to determine practical ways of reducing the amount and/or hazard of the waste 
to be disposed of by partitioning and transmutation and to explore the potential of new reactor 
concepts for nuclear energy to produce less waste. 

– Partitioning and transmutation: research will focus on fundamental assessments of 
the overall concept; demonstration at pilot scale of the most promising partitioning 
technologies; further development of technologies for transmutation; and evaluation 
of their industrial practicability. 
– New reactor cConcepts to produce less waste: research will focus on exploring the 
potential for the more efficient use of fissile material in existing reactors and of 
other concepts to produce less waste in nuclear energy generation.. primarily on T 
The High Temperature Reactor (HTR) , in particular, in particular with regard to 
power conversion system for direct cycle, material properties in a high temperature 
helium environment, innovative fuel coatings , process heat applications and safety 
and licensing issues. 
188



2.3 Radiation protection 
Objectives 

Radiation is used extensively in medicine and industry (including the generation of 
nuclear energy) and its safety is predicated on a sound radiation protection policy and 
its effective implementation. Community research underpins European policy and has 
contributed to the high levels of protection achieved in practice. These standards must 
be maintained and, in some cases, improved and research has a key role in this process. 
The main objective is to resolve uncertainties in the risk from exposures to radiation at 
low and protracted doses (ie, at levels typically encountered by the population and in 
workplaces) which remains a controversial scientific and policy issue, and has important 
implications for the use of radiation in both medicine and industry. Community 
research in other areas will focus on making better use of national efforts, principally 
through their more effective integration by networking and targeted research where this 
would either be complementary to, or provide synergy with, national programmes. 

Research priorities: 

– Quantification of risks associated with low and protracted exposures: research will 
focus on epidemiological studies of suitable exposed populations, complemented by 
cellular and molecular biology research on the interaction between radiation and the 
DNA, cells, organs and the body. 
– Medical exposures and natural sources of radiation: enhancing the safety and 
efficacy of medical uses of radiation; better assessment and management of natural 
sources, in particular, naturally occurring radioactive materials. 
– Protection of the environment and radioecology: conceptual and methodological 
basis for protection of the environment; better assessment and management of the 
impact of natural and artificial sources of radiation on man and the environment. 
– Risk and emergency management: better approaches for risk governance; more 
effective and coherent emergency management in Europe, including rehabilitation of 
contaminated areas. 
– Protection of the workplace: improved monitoring and management of occupational 
exposures in industries involving exposure to radiation. 

3. OTHER ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGIES AND SAFETY 
Objectives 

The objectives are to support EU policies in the fields of health, safety energy and the 
environment, to ensure that European capability is maintained at a high level in relevant 
fields not covered by the thematic priorities and to contribute towards the creation of 
the European Research Area.and better integrate European research on nuclear fission and 
the other uses of ionising radiation. 

Research priorities 
i) Radiation protection 

189



The aims are to underpin Community standards on radiation protection and how they are 
applied, to respond flexibly and rapidly to emerging needs and to enhance European 
capability through better integration of the research effort. Research will focus on: 

– quantification of risks at low and protracted doses typical of those encountered in the 
environment and the workplace, through epidemiological studies of suitable exposed 
populations complemented by cellular and molecular biology research. Collaboration 
with Russia and other CIS countries will be essential for gaining access to data on 
exposed populations of interest. 
– better integration of European research, in particular in the areas of health and 
environmental protection, radioecology, emergency and environmental management, 
medical uses of radiation and exposure to natural sources of radiation. 
ii) Innovative concepts ways of producing nuclear energy 

The aimsare is to investigate possible evaluate innovative concepts and develop improved 
and safer processes in the field of for nuclear energy. Research will focus on: 

– further development Evaluation of innovative concepts and development of 
improved and safer processes for the generation and exploitation of nuclear 
energy that have been identified as offering longer term benefits such as in terms of 
cost, cost, safety, environmental impact, resource utilisation, proliferation 
resistance, or diversity of application. waste management, costs and sustainability. 
iii) Education and training 

The aim is to better integrate European education and training in the nuclear safety and 
radiation protection sciences to combat the decline in both student numbers and teaching 
establishments, thus providing the necessary competence and expertise for the continued safe 
use of nuclear energy and other uses of radiation in industry and medicine. Support will focus 
on: 

– development of a more harmonised approach for education in the nuclear sciences 
and engineering in Europe and its implementation, including and the better 
integration of national resources and capabilities. 
This will be complemented by support for individual fellowships, special training courses, 
training networks, and grants for young research workers from the NIS and CEE countries, 
and transnational access to infrastructure former Soviet Union. 

(iii) Safety of existing nuclear installations 
The aim is to improve safety in existing nuclear installations in Member States and 
candidate countries during their remaining operational lifetimes and subsequent 
decommissioning, making use of the considerable knowledge and experience gained 
internationally from experimental and theoretical research. Research will focus on: 

– plant management including effects of ageing and fuel performance; severe accident 
management, in particular the development of advanced numerical simulation codes; 
integration of European capabilities and knowledge from practical 
decommissioning; developing harmonised approaches to safety and best practice, 
both operational and regulatory, at a European level. 
190



ANNEX II 

INDICATIVE BREAKDOWN OF THE AMOUNT 

Types of activities Amount (EUR million) 
1. Priority thematic areas of 
research 
1.1 Controlled thermonuclear fusion 
1.2 Management of radioactive 
waste 
1.3 Radiation protection 
890 
750 
90 
50 
2. Other activities in the field of 
nuclear technologies and safety 50 
Total 940 

191



ANNEX III 

MEANS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAMME 

In order to implement the specific programme, and in accordance with the Decisions of the 
European Parliament and of the Council concerning the multiannual Framework Programme 
2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community for research and training activities 
aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research Area (2002/…/Euratom) 
and with the rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities for 
the implementation of the framework programme (2002/…/Euratom), the Commission will 
use various instruments. 

The Commission will evaluate the proposals in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out 
in the above mentioned Decisions in order to verify their relevance with regard to the 
objectives of the programme, their scientific and technological excellence, their Community 
added value and the participants' management capacity.* 

As regards the thematic priority areas, management of radioactive waste and radiation 
protection, the importance of the new instruments (Integrated Projects and Networks of 
Excellence) is recognised as being an overall priority means to attain the objectives of 
critical mass, management simplification and European added value contributed by 
Community research in relation to what is already undertaken at national level, and of 
the integration of the research capacities. However, the size of projects is not a criterion 
for exclusion, and access to new instruments is ensured for SMEs and other small 
entities. 

The new instruments will be used from the start of the Sixth Framework Programme in 
each theme and, where deemed appropriate, as a priority means, while maintaining the 
use of specific targeted projects and coordination actions. 

The indirect RTD actions implemented in the area of thermonuclear fusion and in the 
framework of contracts, agreements or legal entities to which the Community is a party 
or of which it is a member, conform to the rules which have been established for them, 
in conformity with the Decision on the rules of participation84 

In carrying out the programme, the Commission may have recourse to technical 
assistance. 

In 2004 an evaluation will be undertaken by independent experts of the efficiency of 
each of these two types of instruments in the execution of the Sixth Framework 
Programme. 

………… 

192



A. NEW INSTRUMENTS 
A.1 Networks of excellence 
In general, the network will be organised around a core group of participants to which others 
may be added. In order to create a virtual centre of excellence, they will integrate a 
considerable part or even the totality of their research activities in the area concerned. These 
activities will often be multidisciplinary, and oriented towards long-term objectives and not 
precise predefined results in terms of products, processes or services. 

In addition to these integrated research activities, the network's joint programme of activities 
will also comprise integration activities as well as activities related to spreading of excellence 
outside the network. 

The purpose of networks of excellence is to strengthen and develop Community 
scientific and technological excellence by means of the integration, at European level, of 
research and training capacities currently existing or emerging at both national and 
regional level. Each network will also aim at advancing knowledge in a particular area 
by assembling a critical mass of expertise. They will foster cooperation between 
capacities of excellence in universities, research centres, enterprises, including SMEs, 
and science and technology organisations. The activities concerned will be generally 
targeted towards long-term, multidisciplinary objectives, rather than predefined results 
in terms of products, processes or services. 

A network of excellence will be implemented by a joint programme of activities 
involving some or, where appropriate, all of the research and training capacities and 
activities of the participants in the relevant area to attain a critical mass of expertise and 
European added value. A joint programme of activities could aim at the creation of a 
self-standing virtual centre of excellence that may result in developing the necessary 
means for achieving a durable integration of the research and training capacities. A 
joint programme of activities will necessarily include those aimed at integration, as well 
as activities related to the spreading of excellence and dissemination of results outside 
the network. 

In pursuing its objectives, the network will therefore carry out: 

– Research and training activities integrated by its participants 
– Integration activities which will comprise in particular: 
– adaptation of the participants' research activities in order to strengthen their 
complementarity; 
– development and utilisation of electronic information and communication 
means, and development of virtual and interactive working methods; 
– short-, medium-and long-term exchanges of personnel, the opening of 
positions to researchers from other members of the network, or their training; 
193



– development and use of joint research infrastructures, and adaptation of the 
existing facilities with a view to a shared use; 
– joint management and exploitation of the knowledge generated, and actions to 
promote innovation. 
– Activities of spreading of excellence which will comprise, as appropriate: 
– training of researchers; 
– communication concerning the achievements of the network and the 
dissemination of knowledge; 
– services in support of technological innovation, aimed in particular at the 
take-up of new technologies; 
– analyses of science/society issues related to the research carried out by the 
network. 
In carrying out some of its activities (such as training of researchers), the network will 
endeavour to ensure publicity by publishing calls for applications. 

The size of the network may vary according to the areas and subjects involved. As an 
indication, the number of participants should not be less than half a dozen. On average, in 
financial terms, the Community contribution to a network of excellence may represent several 
million euros per year. 

The network proposals should comprise the following elements: 

– a general outline of the joint programme of activities, and its content for the first 
yearperiod, broken down into research activities, integration activities, and activities 
for spreading excellence; 
– the role of the participants, identifying the activities and resources that they will 
integrate; 
– the operation of the network (co-ordination and management of activities); 
– the plan for the dissemination of knowledge and the perspectives as regards 
exploitation of the results. 
The partnership may evolve when necessary, within the limit of the initial Community 
contribution, by replacing participants or adding new ones. In most cases, this will be done 
through publication of a competitive call for applications. 

The programme of activities would be updated yearly and would entail a reorientation of 
certain activities or launching of new ones not initially foreseen, which could involve new 
participants. The Commission may launch calls for proposals with a view to the allocation of 
additional contribution in order to cover, for example, an extension of the integrated activities 
of the existing network or the integration of new participants. 

194



The Community's financial contribution will be a specified amount linked to the 
implementation of a set of work, initially calculated on the basis of the resources dedicated to 
carrying out the joint programme of activity and paid on an annual basis, taking into account 
activities and financial reports. shall take the form of a grant for integration, the amount 
of which is determined in relation to the value of the capacities and resources which all 
the participants propose to integrate. It shall As a complement to the resources of 
deployed by the participants in order to carry out the joint programme of activities. It 
should be sufficient to act as an incentive for integration, but without creating a financial 
dependence that might jeopardise the lasting association of the network. 

A.2 Integrated projects 
The objective of this instrument is to strengthen European competitiveness or contribute to 
resolve major societal problems by mobilising a critical mass of research and technological 
development resources and skills existing in Europe. 

Accordingly, each integrated project will have the aim of obtaining identifiable scientific and 
technological results applicable to products, processes or services. The activities carried out in 
the context of an integrated project will have by definition clearly defined objectives even in 
the case of risky research. 

In general, the participants in the projects will be organised around a core group made up of 
the main participants. 

Integrated projects are designed to give increased impetus to the Community's 
competitiveness or to address major societal needs by mobilising a critical mass of 
research and training resources and competence. Each integrated project will be 
assigned clearly defined scientific and technological objectives and should be directed at 
obtaining specific results applicable in terms of, for instance, products, processes or 
services. Under these objectives they may include more long-term or “risky” research. 

Integrated projects will comprise a coherent set of component actions which may vary in 
size and structure according to the tasks to be carried out, each dealing with different 
aspects of the research needed to achieve common overall objectives, and forming a 
coherent whole and implemented in close coordination. 

They will be carried out on the basis of overall financing plans preferably involving 
significant mobilisation of public and private sector funding, including funding from 
EIB and collaboration schemes such as Eureka. 

All the activities carried out in the context of an integrated project will be defined in the 
general framework of an " execution implementation plan" comprising activities relating to: 

– research, technological development and/or demonstration; 
– management, dissemination and transfer of knowledge with a view to promoting 
innovation; 
195



– analysis and assessment of the technologies concerned, as well as the factors relating 
to their exploitation. 
In pursuit of its objectives, it may also comprise activities relating to: 

– training researchers, students, engineers and industrial executives; 
– support for the take-up of new technologies; 
– information and communication, and dialogue with the public concerning the 
science/society aspects of the research carried out within the project. 
The size of an integrated project may vary according to the themes and subjects, depending 
critical mass necessary in order to obtain the expected results under the best possible 
conditions. 

The combined activities of an integrated project may represent a financial size ranging from 
several million euros to several tens of millions of euros. 

In most cases an integrated project will comprise a set of specific actions, relating to certain 
aspects of the research needed to achieve the objectives pursued, of variable sizes and 
structures according to the tasks to be achieved, executed in a closely co-ordinated manner. In 
some cases, however, an integrated project may take the form of a single large project with a 
single component. 

Integrated project proposals should contain the following elements: 

– the scientific and technological objectives of the project; 
– the main lines and timetable of the execution plan, highlighting the articulation of the 
various components; 
– the stages of implementation and the results expected in each one of them; 
– the role of the participants within the consortium and the specific skills of each of 
them; 
– the organisation and management of the project; 
– the plan for the dissemination of knowledge and the exploitation of results; 
– the global budget estimate and the budget for the different activities, including a 
financial plan identifying the various contributions and their origin. 
The partnership may evolve when necessary, within the limit of the initial Community 
contribution, by replacing participants or adding new ones. In most cases, this will be done 
through publication of a competitive call for applications. 

The execution implementation plan will be updated yearly. This updating may entail the 
reorientation of certain activities and the launching of new ones. In the latter case, and where 

196



an additional Community contribution is needed, the Commission will identify these activities 
and the participants who will carry them out, by means of a call for proposals. 

The Community contribution will be part of a financing plan which may involve recourse to 
other financing schemes, in particular Eureka or the instruments of the EIB or the EIF. It may 
amount to up to 50% of the total project budget, broken down into budgets per activity. It will 
be paid annually on the basis of the proposed execution plan, and adjusted according to the 
activities and the financial reports. shall take the form of a grant to the budget, calculated 
as a percentage of the budget allocated by the participants to carry out the project, 
adapted according to the type of activity. 

A.3 Integrated infrastructure initiatives 
Integrated infrastructure initiatives shall combine in a single action several activities 
essential to reinforce and develop research infrastructures, in order to provide services 
at the European level. To this end, they shall combine networking activities with a 
support activity (such as relating to transnational access) or research activities needed to 
improve infrastructure performance, excluding, however, the financing of investment 
for new infrastructures, which can only be financed as specific support actions. They 
will include a component of dissemination of knowledge to potential users, including 
industry and in particular to SMEs. 

B OTHER INSTRUMENTS 

In order to implement the programme, the Commission can have recourse to other 
instruments may also be used: 

– specific targeted projects in order to carry out research or demonstration activities 
– integrated initiatives relating to infrastructure, combining activities that are 
essential to strengthening and developing research infrastructures for the provision of 
services on a European scale 
– mobility and training actions 
– specific co-ordination and support actions in order to achieve the objectives 
identified in all the areas of the programme. 
– accompanying actions by way of additional measures to achieve the objectives of 
the programme or prepare future activities in the context of the Community's 
research and technological development policy. 
B1 Specific targeted research or training projects 

I Specific targeted research projects will aim at improving European 
competitiveness. They will be sharply focussed and will take either of the 
following two forms, or a combination of the two: 

197



(a) a research and technological development project designed to gain new 
knowledge either to improve considerably or to develop new products, 
processes or services or to meet other needs of society and Community 
policies; 
(b) a demonstration project designed to prove the viability of new 
technologies offering potential economic advantage but which cannot be 
commercialised directly. 
II Specific targeted projects on training are designed to facilitate the timely 
diffusion of new knowledge on a European scale and better integrate national 
activities. 
B2 Actions to promote and develop human resources and mobility 

These actions will be targeted at training, development of expertise or transfer of 
knowledge. They will involve support to actions carried out by natural persons, host 
structures, including training networks, and also by European research teams. 

B3 Coordination actions 

Coordination actions are intended to promote and support the coordinated initiatives of 
a range of research and innovation operators aiming at improved integration. They will 
cover activities such as the organisation of conferences, meetings, the performance of 
studies, exchanges of personnel, the exchange and dissemination of good practices, 
setting up information systems and expert groups, and may, if necessary, include 
support for the definition, organisation and management of joint or common initiatives. 

B4 Specific support actions 

Specific support actions will complement the implementation of the Framework 
Programme and may be used to help in preparations for future Community research 
and technological development policy activities including monitoring and assessment 
activities. In particular, they will involve transnational access to infrastructures, 
conferences, seminars, studies and analyses, working groups and expert groups, 
operational support and dissemination, information and communication activities, or a 
combination of these, as appropriate in each case. 

C-SPECIFIC IMPLEMENTATION RULES IN THE AREA OF RESEARCH INTO THERMONUCLEAR 
FUSION 

In the implementation of activities in the research area on controlled thermonuclear fusion, 
the following rules will be applied. 

I. PROCEDURES 
The projects undertaken in the context of shared-cost of research and technological 
development actions will be carried out on the basis of procedures set out in: 

198



– the contracts of association with the Member States and the Associated States or 
organisations in those States, 
– the European Fusion Development Agreement (EFDA), 
– any other multilateral agreement concluded between the Community and associated 
organisations (such as the agreement on the promotion of mobility) or legal entities 
which may be set up after the competent consultative committee has given its 
opinion, 
– other contracts of limited duration, in particular with organisations in the Member 
States or the associated states without an association, 
– international agreements covering projects carried out in the framework of cooperation with third countries, such as ITER, and by legal entities which may be set 
up in the framework of such agreements. 
II. FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION 

The Framework programme financial contribution to the current expenditure of the 
Associations and to contracts of limited duration will be progressively and substantially 
reduced from its current annual rate, over the duration of the framework programme. 

The modalities of participation of the Community in the activities related to the joint 
implementation of projects carried out within the framework of international co-operations 
such as ITER are defined in the relevant international co-operations and by the legal entities 
which can be established in the frame of these agreements. Appropriate legal entities, or any 
other appropriate forms, may be created by Euratom and the associated organisations in order 
to manage this Community participation.] 

199



RTDT activities and Community financial contribution according to type of instrument 

TYPE OF INSTRUMENT RTD ACTIVITIES COMMUNITY CONTRIBUTION (1) 
Networks of Excellence Priority thematic areas 
Other activities in the field of 
technology and safety (2) 
nuclear 
Grant for integration: maximum of 
25% ofthe value ofthe capacity and 
resources proposed for integration by 
participants as a fixed amount to 
support the joint programme of 
activities (3) 
Integrated Projects Priority thematic areas 
Other activities in the field of 
technology and safety (2) 
nuclear 
Grant to the budgetofamaximum of: 
50% for research 
35% for demonstration 
100% for certain other activities such 
as training of researchers and 
consortium management (4) (5) 
Specific targeted research 
or training projects 
Priority thematic areas (2) 
Other activities in the field of 
technology and safety 
nuclear 
Grant to the budgetofamaximum of 
50% of the budget (4) (5) 
Actions to promote and 
develop human resources 
and mobility 
Priority thematic areas 
Other activities in the field of 
technology and safety 
nuclear 
Grant to the budgetofamaximum of 
100% of the budget (4), if necessary as 
a lump sum 
Coordination actions Priority thematic areas 
Other activities in the field of 
technology and safety 
nuclear 
Grant to the budgetofamaximum of 
100 % of the budget (4) 
Specific support actions Priority thematic areas 
Other activities in the field of 
technology and safety 
nuclear 
Grant to the budgetofamaximum of 
100% of the budget (4) (7), if necessary 
as a lump sum 
Integrated initiatives 
relating to infrastructure 
Priority thematic areas 
Other activities in the field of 
technology and safety 
nuclear 
Grant to the budget: depending on the 
type of activity, of 50 to 100% of the 
budget (4) (5) (6) 

(1) As a general principle, the Community financial contribution cannot cover 100% of the 
expenditure of an indirect action with the exception of proposals covering a purchase price 
governed by the terms applicable to public procurement procedures or taking the form of a predefined lump sum pre-set by the Commission. 
However, the Community financial contribution may bear up to 100% of the expenditure of an 
indirect action if they complement those otherwise borne by the participants. Also, in the 
specific case of coordination actions, it covers up to 100% of the budget necessary for the 
coordination of activities funded by the participants themselves. 

(2) In duly justified cases. 
200



(3) This rate varies for different areas. 
(4) Subject to specific conditions specific legal entities, particularly public bodies, will receive 
funding of up to 100% of their marginal/additional cost. 
(5) The rates of assistance may be differentiated in accordance with the rules of the Community 
framework for State aid for research and development depending on whether activities relate to 
research (maximum 50%) or demonstration (maximum 35%) or to other activities 
implemented, such as training of researchers (maximum 100%) or the management of the 
consortium (maximum 100%). 
(6) The activities of an integrated initiative relating to infrastructure must include one networking 
activity (Coordination Action: maximum 100% of the budget) and at least one of the following 
activities: research activities (maximum 50% of the budget) or specific service activities 
(Specific Support Action, for example, transnational access to research infrastructures: 
maximum 100% of the budget). 
(7) For actions in support of research infrastructure relating to preparatory technical work 
(including feasibility studies) and the development of new infrastructure, 6th Framework 
Programme participation is restricted to maximum of 50% and 10% of the budget respectively. 
201



FINANCIAL STATEMENT


Policy area(s): Research
Activity(ies): Research and training actions under the Euratom Treaty.


TITLE OF ACTION 

Proposal for a Council Decision adopting a specific programme 
for research and training actions on "Nuclear Energy". 

1. BUDGET LINE(S) + HEADING(S) 
Subsection B6 6 Indirect Actions: these lines will be specified at the beginning of the 
2003 budget procedure, taking into account the ABB nomenclature, which is being 
drawn up. 

2. OVERALL FIGURES 
2.1. Total allocation for action (Part B): €900 940 million for commitments 
2.2. Period of application: 
2002-2006 

2.3. Overall multiannual estimate of expenditure: 
a) Schedule of commitment appropriations/payment appropriations (financial 
intervention) (see point 6.1.1) 

€ million (to 3rd decimal place) 

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 + Total 
Commitments 177.800 
187.800 
186.800 
195.700 
189.800 
197.800 
197.100 
203.600 
-751.500 
784.900 
Payments 123.700 123.200 157.600 147.000 200.000 751.500 
129.400 128.600 164.800 153.100 209.000 784.900 

b) Technical and administrative assistance and support expenditure (see point 6.1.2) 
This budget category does not apply in this field. 

202



c) Overall financial impact of human resources and other administrative expenditure 

(see points 7.2 and 7.3) 

Commitments/ 

36.300 

36.800 

37.400 

38.000 

-

148.500 

Payments 

37.600 

38.400 

39.200 

39.900 

155.100 

TOTAL 
a+b+c 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 + Total 
Commitments 214.100 
225.400 
223.600 
234.100 
227.200 
237.000 
235.100 
243.500 
-900.000 
940.000 
Payments 160.000 160.000 195.000 185.000 200.000 900.000 
167.000 167.000 204.000 193.000 209.000 940.000 

2.4. Compatibility with the financial programming and the financial perspective 
x Proposal compatible with existing financial programming 

. This proposal will entail reprogramming of the relevant heading in the 
financial perspective. 
. This may entail application of the provisions of the Interinstitutional 
Agreement. 
2.5 Financial impact on revenue 
. No financial implications (involves technical aspects regarding implementation 
of a measure) 
OR 

x Financial impact -the effect on revenue is as follows: 

Certain Associated States will contribute to the funding of the Specific Programme. 

The association agreements are linked to a Framework Programme. Their renewal 
will be renegotiated following adoption of the new Framework Programme and it is 
therefore impossible to forecast the amount of revenue in question. 

In accordance with the association agreements for the current Framework 
Programme and in the context of their renewal, revenue not used by the end of the 
current Framework Programme (31/12/2002), will be transferred to the new 
Framework Programme. 

In accordance with Article 27 of the Financial Regulation, certain revenue may be 
refused. 

203



3. BUDGET CHARACTERISTICS
Type of expenditure New EFTA 
participation 
Participation 
applicant 
countries 
Heading 
Financial 
Perspective 
Comp/Non 
-comp 
Diff/Nondiff 
YES/NO YES/NO YES/NO No 3 

4. LEGAL BASIS 
Article7of theEuratom Treaty. 

Proposal for a Council Decision relating to the multiannual framework programme 
2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community for research and training 
activities aimed at contributing to the creation of the European Research Area. 

5. DESCRIPTION AND GROUNDS 
5.1. Need for Community intervention 
5.1.1 Objectives pursued 
As recognised at the highest political level by the European Council in Lisbon, Feira, Nice 
and again recently in Stockholm, research is a central component of the knowledge-based 
economy and society developing worldwide. The objective set for the EU in Lisbon was "to 
become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable 
of sustainable economic growth, more and better jobs and greater social cohesion" over the 
next decade. More than ever, research is proving to be one of the main driving forces for 
economic and social progress, a key factor in business competitiveness, employment and the 
quality of life. In addition, science and technology are key elements in the policy-making 
process at both EU and national level. 

However, Europe still has structural weaknesses where research is concerned. These can be 
summedup infour main points: 

I. Insufficient and dispersed investment in research and technological development and 
more generally in knowledge (RTD, education and software), with the result that we 
are lagging behind our competitors. In 1999, the EU invested EUR 76 billion less 
than the US in research and development. It is now lagging behind its competitors in 
terms of research spending as a proportion of GDP (in 1999, the figure was 1.9% for 
the EU compared with 2.6% for the US and 2.9% for Japan).85 In 1999, the US 
invested some 9% in knowledge, ahead of the EU (7.6%) and Japan (6.9%). And the 
gap is continuingtowiden. 
II. Insufficient human resources in research. Researchers represent 5.3/1000 of the 
workforce in the EU (1998), 7.4/1000 in the US (1993) and 8.9/1000 in Japan (1998) 
where there are twice as many researchers in industry. Direct public spending on 
85 

1998 figure. 

204



higher education corresponds to 0.9% of GDP in the EU, 1.4% in the US and 0.5% in 
Japan (1997). 

III. A limited capacity to translate scientific breakthroughs into innovative and 
competitive products and services, despite high-quality scientific production. The 
figures for the number of patents granted by the European, American and Japanese 
patents offices per million inhabitants are 32 in the EU, 49 in the US and 88 in Japan. 
In 1998, the trade balance for high-tech products was a €28 billion deficit for the EU 
(a trend confirmed throughout the decade), compared with a €8 billion deficits for 
the US and a EUR 39 billion surplus for Japan. Venture-capital investment in the 
advanced sectors corresponds to 80% in the US and, while it is on the increase, only 
26 % in the EU and 23% in Japan. 
IV. A fragmentation of research policies in Europe. The EU has not yet adopted a fullyfledged research policy. The 15 national policies co-exist side by side and alongside 
the Community framework programme without adequate coordination between them 
to achieve efficient organisation and exploitation. This lack of coordination also 
affects the establishment and efficient exploitation of research infrastructures. 
To alleviate this situation, the Commission has proposed and Council and Parliament have 
endorsed the creation of a "European Research Area". Bringing it about will necessarily be 
the product of a joint effort by the EU, the Member States and research stakeholders. The EU 
research framework programmes (2002-2006) and the specific programmes will make a 
contribution to this in particular through the significant leverage effect that they can have for 
integrating, coordinating and structuring research in the EU and strengthening the foundations 
of the European Research Area. 

A structural change in the EU's science and technology fabric to remedy the above mentioned 
weaknesses will need resources commensurate with the objective. The Commission has 
proposed funding for the framework programme totalling EUR 17.5 billion, corresponding to 
the previous level of funding plus inflation and growth (but still representing only 5 to 6% of 
public spending on RTD). The Commission takes the view that this sort of amount could have 
a significant effect on the research system as such, improve at least some of the overall 
research indicators, and have a significant effect in the priority areas of the framework 
programme which will generate growth in the EU. In overall terms, this level of funding will 
make it possible to maintain the Community's RTD effort expressed as percentage of GDP at 
its present level during the period 2003-2006. 

The plan is to implement the framework programmes by five specific programmes, three of 
which come under the European Community Treaty and two under the European Atomic 
Energy (Euratom) Treaty. Each specific programme is identified according to the nature of 
the instruments deployed, reflecting the objectives and organisation of the framework 
programme: 

– A programme on "Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area" 
comprising the indirect actions proposed under the heading "Integrating research" 
and under the heading "Strengthening the foundations of the European Research 
Area", thus bring together research and coordination activities. 
– A programme on "Structuring the European Research Area", comprising horizontal, 
support and structuring activities. 
205



– Two "Joint Research Centre (JRC)" programmes comprising the direct actions 
carried out by the JRC in the non-nuclear and nuclear fields respectively. 

– A "Nuclear energy" programme comprising the indirect actions carried out in the 
field of nuclear energy. 
The objectives of the specific programme on "Nuclear energy" are set out below by action 
areas, together with their justification and the European added value that they can provide. 

1. Treatment and disposal Management of radioactive waste 
The objective is to develop and test repository technologies, investigate suitable sites, 
promote basic scientific understanding relating to safety and safety assessment methods, 
investigate possible ways of reducing the impact of radioactive waste and to develop 
decision processes that are perceived as fair and equitable by the stakeholders involved. 

Justification and European added value 

– The absence of a broadly agreed approach for the management and disposal of high 
level wastes is a major impediment to the winding up of past installations, as well as 
the continued and further use of nuclear energy 
– An agreed approach would have positive implications for cost, safety and security of 
energy supplies 
Existing radioactive wastes need to be managed. 

2. Fusion Energy Research 
Fusion energy could contribute to the emission-free large-scale production of base-load 
electricity. The advances made in fusion energy research justify further pursuit of a vigorous 
effort towards the long-term objective of a fusion power plant. 

Justification and European added value 

– Need to progress further towards the understanding of fusion plasmas in conditions 
relevant to a future reactor. 
– The exploitation of the facilities, notably JET, which have been constructed with 
preferential support, would not be adequately possible on a national scale. Until 
ITER is in operation, JET is the most powerful tool existing in the world to advance 
in the study of fusion plasmas. 
– The EU by presenting itself as a single partner is in a stronger position for 
participating in an international project like ITER than Member States individually. 
– Need for more fundamental studies and training of young scientists in the area 
fusion. 
Role in ensuring dissemination of the results in the Member States. 

3. Radiation protection 
The main objective is to resolve uncertainties in the risk from exposures to radiation at 
levels typically encountered by the population and in workplaces. This remains a 
controversial scientific and policy issue and has important implications for the use of 
radiation in both medicine and industry. 

206



Justification and European added value 

As radiation is used extensively in medicine and industrial applications, its safety is 
related to a sound protection policy. The high standards of radiation protection in the 
EU must be thus maintained (and improved, where necessary) through focused and 
coordinated research. 

4. Other activities in the field of nuclear technologies and safety 
The objectives are to support EU policies in the fields of health, safety energy and the 
environment, and better integrate European research on nuclear fission and the other uses of 
ionising radiation to ensure that European capability is maintained at a high level in 
relevant fields not covered by the thematic priorities and to contribute to towards the 
creation of the European Research Area. 

Justification and European added value 

– Improved knowledge of risks at low doses will enable the more cost effective 
allocation of resources to radiation protection 
– A deeper integration is critical to maintaining capabilities in the general context of a 
mature and/or declining nuclear industry 
– Necessity to face important competitors. 
– The number of students and institutions offering nuclear education is declining 
– The safety of existing nuclear installations should be maintained and/or 
improved. 
5.1.2 Measures taken in connection with ex ante evaluation 
When preparing the specific programme proposals the Commission services carried out an ex 
ante evaluation. Its results reflect in particular: 

– the recommendations of the five-year assessment of the framework programmes and 
specific programmes carried out by independent experts in the course of the year 
2000; 
– the Commission's mid-term review of the fifth framework programme (1998-2002) 
presented in COM(2000)612 of 4 October 2000 and detailed in Commission staff 
paper SEC(2000)1780 of 23 October 2000; 
– wide-ranging consultations among the protagonists relating to the two 
communications on the European Research Area in the course of the year 200086 and 
the framework programme proposal at the beginning of 2001; 
– a series of internal and external Commission studies relating to economic, political 
and foresight areas and the impact of RTD activities. 
COM (2000) 6, 18 January 2000
COM (2000) 612, 4 October 2000.


207



The results of the ex-ante evaluation carried out are reflected in particular in the choices made 
with regard to the structure of the programmes, the objectives and priorities and the 
implementing instruments. 

The objectives and priorities were selected in accordance with the rigorous application of the 
criterion of European added value. 

This covers the following aspects applied to the priority themes and activities selected, the 
justification and European added value of which are described in greater detail in point 5.1. 
and the expected results in point 5.2.: 

– Cost and scale of research beyond the possibilities of a single country, and need to 
assemble a “critical mass” of financial and human resources; 
– Importance of collaboration in economic terms (economies of scale) and as a result 
of its beneficial effects on the private research effort and industrial competitiveness 
– Maintenance or development of the position of the EU in RTD areas strategic for the 
EU 
– Need to combine the complementary expertise present in the different countries, 
more particularly in the face of interdisciplinary problems and the need to have 
recourse to comparative studies on a European scale 
– Links with the priority interests of the EU as well as with Community legislation and 
policies 
– The necessarily transnational nature of the research as the result of the scale on 
which the problems arise or for scientific reasons. 
With regard to the implementing instruments, two three main new instruments will be applied 
in the context of the Euratom programme. By their nature they can only be implemented at 
Community level. They have been designed to contribute to the establishment of: 

– a critical mass needed and the integration of research; 
– closer links between the programmes and Member States' activities and coordination 
of national programmes; 
– cooperation in areas strategic for the EU and solutions to major challenges facing the 
EU; 
– the excellence and attractiveness of S&T in Europe; 
– dissemination and exploitation of S&T results throughout the EU. 
These instruments are: 

a) networks of excellence 

The purpose of this instrument is to strengthen European scientific and technological 
excellence. Each network is intended to advance knowledge in a particular area by assembling 
a critical mass of expertise. Targeted towards long-term objectives, the activities concerned, 
often multidisciplinary, are not aimed at precise predefined results in terms of products, 

208



processes or services but the progressive and lasting integration of research capacities existing 
in Europe at both national and regional level. To this end, in order to create a virtual centre of 
excellence the members of the network will implement a joint programme of activities 
integrating a substantial proportion or even the entirety of their activities in the area 
concerned. 

b) Integrated projects 

The purpose of this instrument is to increase European competitiveness or help to resolve 
major societal problems by mobilising a critical mass of resources and research and 
technological development expertise existing in Europe. Accordingly, each integrated project 
will have the aim of obtaining a certain number of precise results in terms of products, 
processes or services. The activities carried out in the context of an integrated project will by 
definition be targeted even in the case of risky research. All the activities carried out in the 
context of an integrated project will fit into the general framework of an “implementation 
plan”. 

c) Integrated infrastructure initiatives 

Integrated infrastructure initiatives shall combine in a single action several activities 
essential to reinforce and develop research infrastructures, in order to provide services 
at the European level. To this end, they shall combine networking activities with a 
support activity (such as relating to transnational access) or research activities needed to 
improve infrastructure performance, excluding, however, the financing of investment 
for new infrastructures, which can only be financed as specific support actions. They 
will include a component of dissemination of knowledge to potential users, including 
industry and in particular to SMEs. 

In order to implement the programme, other instruments may also be used: 

d) Specific targeted research or training projects 

i) Specific targeted research projects will aim at improving European 
competitiveness. They will be sharply focussed and will take either of the 
following two forms, or a combination of the two: 

-a research and technological development project designed to gain new 
knowledge either to improve considerably or to develop new products, processes 
or services or to meet other needs of society and Community policies; 

-a demonstration project designed to prove the viability of new technologies 
offering potential economic advantage but which cannot be commercialised 
directly. 

ii) Specific targeted projects on training are designed to facilitate the timely 
diffusion of new knowledge on a European scale and better integrate national 
activities. 

e) Actions to promote and develop human resources and mobility 

209



These actions will be targeted at training, development of expertise or transfer of 
knowledge. They will involve support to actions carried out by natural persons, host 
structures, including training networks, and also by European research teams. 

f) Coordination actions 

Coordination actions are intended to promote and support the coordinated initiatives of 
a range of research and innovation operators aiming at improved integration. They will 
cover activities such as the organisation of conferences, meetings, the performance of 
studies, exchanges of personnel, the exchange and dissemination of good practices, 
setting up information systems and expert groups, and may, if necessary, include 
support for the definition, organisation and management of joint or common initiatives. 

g) Specific support actions 

Specific support actions will complement the implementation of the Framework 
Programme and may be used to help in preparations for future Community research 
and technological development policy activities including monitoring and assessment 
activities. In particular, they will involve transnational access to infrastructures, 
conferences, seminars, studies and analyses, working groups and expert groups, 
operational support and dissemination, information and communication activities, or a 
combination of these, as appropriate in each case. 

5.1.3 Measures taken following ex post evaluation 
The recommendations of the five-year assessment of the framework programmes and the 
specific programmes carried out in 2000 have been taken into account in preparing the 
specific programme proposals, in particular those concerning: 

– the need to make up for Europe's trailing position in the field of RTD compared with 
its competitors; 
– the need for complementarity and coherence between national and Community RTD 
policies and the essential role of the Commission in achieving this objective; 
– the beneficial impact of the framework programme which "fills a gap in Europe by 
enabling researchers in universities and in industry to carry out applied work 
together"; 
– the need to lighten the management procedures of the 1998-2002 programme and the 
need to "rethink the structures and procedures for managing the framework 
programme"; 
– placing EU research activities in the broader context of a genuine European research 
policy; 
– more concentrated programmes; 
– continuing with the research needed to achieve the objectives of Community 
policies; 
210



– the desired move towards an adapted range of instruments that are more flexible, 
taking account of all the possibilities offered by the Treaty. 
In addition, the mid-term review of the fifth framework programme has resulted in particular 
in adjustments to the annual work programmes for the specific programmes, aimed at 
concentrating efforts to a greater extent and launching pilot projects for the measures 
envisaged for the next framework programme (networks, clusters, industrial platforms, largerscale projects, etc.). 

5.2. Actions envisaged and means of budget intervention 
The actions envisaged for the specific programme on "Nuclear energy" are set out below, 
presented by detailed action areas. This presentation makes it possible to highlight the 
estimated results expected, the contributions to the overall objectives of the framework 
programme or of the Community or potential performance parameters associated with these. 
These indications are intended as yardsticks and not definitively adopted goals. 

A correspondence between the action areas and the types of instruments used is given further 
on in the form of a table. 

211



1. Treatment and disposal Management of radioactive waste 
i) Research on geological disposal 

(Improvement of fundamental knowledge, developing and testing technologies, New 
and improved tools) 

ii) Partitioning and transmutation and other concepts to produce less waste in nuclear 
energy generation new reactor concepts 

(Partitioning and transmutation; new reactor concepts) 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 

– Sound technical basis for demonstrating the safety of disposing of high level 
radioactive waste in geological formations 
– Evaluation of the practicability, on an industrial scale, of partitioning and 
transmutation 
– Conceptsion for a more efficient use of fissile material of new reactors or fuel 
cycles with potential for commercial exploitation 
2. Fusion Energy Research 
i) Associations’ programme in physics and technology 

(R&D in fusion physics and plasma engineering, Structured R&D activities in fusion 
technology, Investigations of socio-economic aspects) 

ii) Exploitation of the JET facilities 
iii) Next Step/ITER 
Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 

– Establishment of a framework for ITER construction and operation, 
– Starting up of the Next Step / ITER construction, 
– Full exploitation of the JET facilities 
– Commissioning of the Stellarator W-7-X. 
– a deeper assessment of fusion configurations akin to the Tokamak, 
– A deeper understanding of the socio-economic background concerning fusion as an 
energy source. 
– Further developing the physics and technology (in particular materials) basis for 
fusion energy. 
3. Radiation protection 
212



– Quantification of risks associated with low and protracted exposures 
– Medical exposures and natural sources of radiation 
– Protection of the environment and radioecology 
– Risk and emergency management 
– Protection of the workplace 
Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 
– Improved quantification of risks for exposure to low doses 
– Conceptual and methodological basis for protection of the environment 
– More effective and coherent emergency response in Europe 
– Deeper integration of European research in radiation protection 
4. Other activities in the field of nuclear technologies and safety 
i) radiation protection 
i) innovative concepts ways of producing nuclear energy 
ii) education and training 

iii) safety of existing nuclear installations 

Expected results, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance parameters 

– Improved quantification of low-dose radiation risks 
– Development of innovative ways of producing nuclear energy and assessment of 
their potentials 
– Development of a co-operative European programme on education and training in 
the field of nuclear energy 
– Improvement of Community standards providing enhanced health and environmental 
protection 
– Improving safety in existing nuclear installations 
213



The means of intervention and financial participation under the framework programme will be 
as follows, according to the objectives: 

Areas Activities/ 
Objectives of 
instrument 
Type of instrument Financial contribution of 
Framework Programme 
Priority 
thematic area 
Fusion (1) 
Management of 
radioactive waste 
-Networks of 
excellence 
-Integrated projects 
-Integrated initiatives 
Grant for integration 
Grant to the budget 
Radiation protection 
relating to infrastructure Grant to the budget 
-in duly justified cases: 
-Specific targeted 
research or training 
projects 
-Coordination and 
specific support actions 
-actions to promote and 
develop human 
resources and mobility 
Grant to the budget 
Other activities 
in the field of 
nuclear 
technologies 
and safety 
Innovative concepts 
Education and 
training 
Safety of existing 
installations 
-Specific targeted 
research or training 
projects 
-Coordination and 
specific support actions 
-actions to promote and 
develop human 
resources and mobility 
-in duly justified casesnetworks of excellence 
-integrated projects 
-integrated initiatives 
relating to infrastructure 
Grant to the budget 
Grant to the budget 
Grant for integration 
Grant to the budget 
Grant to the budget 

(1) Accompanying actions can also be implemented throughout the specific programme. 
(1) Fusion energy research 
Projects undertaken in the context of shared-cost research and technological development activities 
are implemented on the basis of procedures set out in: 
– contracts of association with Member States and Associated States or organisations in those 
States, 
214 


– the European Fusion Development Agreement (EFDA), 
– any other multilateral agreement between the Community and the associated organisations 
(such as the agreement on the promotion of mobility) or the legal entities which may be set up 
after consulting the competent advisory committee, 
– other contracts of limited duration, notably with organisations in the Member States or 
Associated States having no association, 

– international agreements covering projects carried out in the context of cooperation with third 
countries such as ITER and by legal entities which may be set up under those agreements. 
The setting-up of consortia for integrated projects having a common objective will be encouraged. 

The Community's budgetary intervention is aimed at research centres, universities, businesses 
and national or international bodies situated in the Member States and the European 
associated states which fund research activities. The latter may also serve as intermediaries 
for Community budget intervention. Where this proves necessary to achieve the objectives of 
the programme, international organisations and bodies in the Member States of the CIS may 
exceptionally receive Community funding. Such funding must be essential in order to achieve 
the objectives of the programme. 

5.3. Means of implementation 
The Commission will ensure the implementation of the actions. In certain duly justified cases, 
it may call upon external bodies for assistance. 

6. FINANCIAL IMPACT 
6.1. Total financial impact on Part B -(over the entire programming period) 
For the record, the reference allocation for the Framework Programme of the 
European Community is EUR 16 275 million. The total amount for the Framework 
Programmes 2002-2006 is EUR 17 500 million. 

6.1.1 Financial intervention: Commitments in €milllion (to three decimal places) 
Breakdown by objective Amount (EUR million) 
1. Priority thematic areas of research 
1.1 Controlled thermonuclear fusion 
1.2 Management of radioactive waste 
1.3 Radiation protection 
890 
750 
90 
50 
2. Other activities in the field of 
nuclear technologies and safety 
50 
Total 940 

An annual schedule for each of these objectives is not significant at this level. It 
could only be defined as being strictly proportional to that for the entire specific 
programme, itself in line with that of the framework programme. 

215 


The annual internal breakdown will be established subsequently within the work 
programmes. 
6.1.2 Technical and administrative assistance, support 
(Commitment appropriations) 
expenditure and IT expenditure 
This budget category does not apply in this field. 
6.2. Calculation of costs 
programming period) 
by measure envisaged in Part B (over the entire 

Here too, a breakdown by objective and type of measure cannot be established at this stage, 
since the outputs from the indirect research actions are research projects resulting from calls 
for proposals after evaluation, hence the difficulty of quantifying these actions in advance. 

7. IMPACT ON STAFF AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE 
The ceiling for administrative expenditure on this programme is 16.5% of the €900 940 
million planned for this action as a whole. 

This particular situation is due to the fact that this programme has 224 research posts at its 
disposal, costing -for the whole period -85% of the requested ceiling. 

This high number of posts arises out of the mode of operation of the programme. In fact,for 
which 115 Commission’s officials 50% of these posts are seconded either to national 
laboratories in different Member States under association agreements or to the ITER project. 

Moreover, There were successive redeployments throughout the fifth Framework Programme 
in order to reduce the staff on the programme and better to balance the staff and the budget for 
the period 1999-2002. These redeployments will continue and the particular situation of 
the Commission staff working abroad will be examined. 

The programmes other expenditure is quite low owing mainly to the small number of 
contracts managed. Note that about a third of this other expenditure also relates to the ITER 
project. 

7.1. Impact on human resources 
Type of post 
Staff to be assigned to management of the 
action using existing and/or additional 
resources 
Total 
Description of tasks deriving 
from the action 
Number of 
permanent posts 
Number of 
temporary posts 
Research officials 
or temporary staff 
A 
B 
C 
175 
31 
18 
If necessary, a fuller 
description of the tasks may 
be annexed. 
Other human resources 
27 to 32 personyears 
See costs 
Total 224 

There is a specific establishment plan for the indirect research actions comprising a total of 
954 A posts, 273 B posts and 427 C posts, giving a total of 1654 posts (EC and EURATOM, 
including SAB 3/2001). 

216 


To this establishment plan should be added 156166 operating budget posts with no financial 
impact on the budget for these programmes, under the heading of participation in the 
formulation and implementation of research policy. 

7.2 Overall financial impact of human resources 
Type of human resources Amount €million Method of calculation * 
Officials 
Temporary research staff 126.000 
On the basis of an extrapolation 
of actual costs in 2000 for this 
personnel, inflation of 2% per 
annum et and an average 
vacancy rate of 8%. 
Other human resources 
(give budget line) 
5.500 to 6.500 
6.000 to 7.000 
Based on an extrapolation of 
real costs in 2000 and forecast 
expenditure for 2001/2002. 
Total 
131.500 to 132.500 
132.000 to 133.000 
Financed from B6 (research 
budget) 

The amounts correspond to total expenditure for the duration of the programme. 

7.3 Other administrative expenditure deriving from the action 
Budget line 
(No and heading) Amount €million Method of calculation 
(B6) 
Missions, operation, infrastructure, IT, 
communication (depending on the types of 
expenditure authorised in the table of 
equivalence for indirect RTD actions) 
16.000 to 17.000 
22.100 to 23.100 
Based on an extrapolation of 
real costs in 2000 and forecast 
expenditure for 2001/2002 
Total 16.000 to 17.000 
22.100 to 23.100 
Financed from B6 (research 
budget) 

The amounts correspond to total expenditure for the action for the four years of 
implementation of this specific programme, i.e. total annual expenditure of €37.000 €38.750 
million. 

I. Total (7.2 + 7.3) (€million) 148.500 155.000 
II. Duration of action (years) 4 
III. Indicative annual cost (€million) 37.000 38.750 

8. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
8.1 Monitoring system 
The specific programmes are designed to help bring about the European Research Area and 
they will be implemented in parallel with and in close collaboration with other Community 
and national activities in pursuit of the same objectives. The very nature of research and the 
different types of actions at different levels make it difficult to determine causes and effects, 
and monitoring and evaluating the result and impact are complex. 

Based on the experience of the earlier programmes and methodological studies in progress, a 
series of instruments has already been or is being finalised in order to develop the objectives 
and monitor and evaluate the results and impact of the framework programme and 

217



programmes implementing it, as well as the activities relating to bringing about the ERA. The 
Commission will take stock of the development of these instruments in good time before the 
programmes are implemented. 

By these means, a structured system for collection of information and statistics will be 
progressively put in place. 

Within this context general indicators specifically adapted to the framework programme will 
be developed, to make it possible to evaluate in particular the contributions of the 
programmes in relation to the challenges facing the EU identified in point 5.1 (Investment in 
RTD and in knowledge, overall and in the priority fields for the EU, human RTD resources, 
exploitation of RTD results, coherence of national and Community research policies and with 
regard to research infrastructures). 

In addition, more specific indicators will be identified for the different objectives of the 
programmes; relating in particular to the production, management and networking, 
exploitation and impact of the knowledge arising from the activities carried out under the 
programmes. First thoughts in this connection are already indicated in point 5.2 under the 
heading of results expected, contributions to overall objectives or potential performance 
parameters. 

8.2 Arrangements and schedule for the planned evaluation 
– Annual monitoring: The Commission will, by calling upon suitable expertise 
where appropriate, continuously monitor the implementation of the Framework 
Programme and the specific programmes in the light of the objectives set. It will 
assess, in particular, whether the objectives, priorities, instruments, financial 
resources and management are still appropriate to the changing situation. 
The objective is to step up and improve the systematic collection, coherence and 
quality of the basic information, in order to allow efficient analysis and monitoring 
as well as a substantial contribution to the five-year assessment. In order to make 
Community research managers more aware of issues relating to the monitoring of the 
implementationand the results and the impact of the programmes, it is also planned 
to draw up a joint self-assessment format. In addition, measures will be taken to 
ensure greater coherence between the monitoring of the framework programme, the 
specific programmes and progress with the European Research Area. 

Annual report: Progress with implementing the Framework Programme and the 
specific programmes will be published in the annual report submitted to the 
European Parliament and the Council pursuant to Article 173 of the Treaty. It will set 
out in particular the results of the annual monitoring, a description of the activities 
carried out in the field of research and technological development, realisation of the 
European Research Area and dissemination of results during the preceding year, and 
the work programme for the current year. 

– Five-year assessment: Before submitting its proposal for the next Framework 
Programme and the specific programmes, the Commission will have an assessment 
carried out by independent high-level experts of the implementation of Community 
activities during the five years preceding that assessment, the achievement of the 
objectives and the impact of the activities in the light of the objectives applicable to 
the periods in question. The Commission will communicate the conclusions of this 
218



assessment, accompanied by its observations, to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. 

9. ANTI-FRAUD MEASURES 
By submitting reports which may give rise to the consolidation of revenue in the participants' 
accounts, the financial coordinator should make all the financial documentation available to 
the Commission to enable it to carry out its financial audits, indicating the timetable and the 
consolidation of the participants' accounts. 

Where appropriate, the Commission will carry out such financial audits, in particular if it has 
reasons to doubt the realistic nature of the accounts vis-à-vis the progress of work described 
in the activity reports. 

The Community's financial audits will be carried out either by its own staff or by accounting 
experts approved according to the law of the participant audited. The Community will chose 
the latter freely, while avoiding any risks of conflicts of interest, which might be indicated to 
it by the participant subject to the audit. 

In addition, the Commission will make sure in carrying out the research activities, that the 
financial interests of the European Communities are protected by effective checks and, in case 
of detected irregularities, measures as well as deterrent and proportionate sanctions. 

In order to achieve this aim, rules on checks, measures and sanctions, with references to the 
Regulations Nos 2988/95, 2185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 will be taken up in all legal 
instruments used in the implementation of the programmes, including the specific contracts 
and model contracts. 

In particular, the following points will have to be provided for in the contracts : 

– the introduction of specific contractual clauses to protect the financial interests of the 
EC in carrying out checks and controls in relation to the awards; 
– accordance with Regulations Nos 2185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99; 
– the application of administrative sanctions for all intentional or negligent 
irregularities in the implementation of the contracts, in accordance with the 
framework Regulation No 2988/95, including a black-listing mechanism; 
– the fact that possible recovery orders in case of irregularities and fraud be 
enforceable pursuant to Article 164 of the EAEC Euratom Treaty. 
219



Amended proposal for a
COUNCIL DECISION


adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research and training to be carried out by 
the Joint Research Centre by means of direct actions for the European Atomic Energy 
Community 

220



2001/0126 (CNS) 

Amended proposal for a 

COUNCIL DECISION 

adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research and training to be carried out by 
the Joint Research Centre by means of direct actions for the European Atomic Energy 
Community 

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, and in 
particular the first paragraph of Article 7 thereof, 

Having regard to the proposal from the Commission87, 

Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament88, 

Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee89, 

Whereas: 

(1) By Decision No …/../Euratom, the Council adopted the multiannual framework 
programme 2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community for research and 
training activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research 
Area90 (hereinafter referred to as “the framework programme ") to be implemented by 
means of research and training programme(s) drawn up in accordance with Article 7 
of the Treaty, which define the detailed rules for their implementation, fix their 
duration and provide for the means deemed necessary. 
(2) The rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities and 
for the dissemination of research results, for the framework programme, adopted by 
the Council in Decision No.…/…/Euratom91 should apply to this programme. 
(3) In implementing this programme, emphasis should be given to promoting the mobility 
and training of researchers, and innovation, in the Community. 
(4) For the purpose of implementing the framework programme, it may be appropriate to 
engage in international co-operation activities, in particular on the basis of Chapter X 
of the Treaty, with third countries and international organisations. Special attention 
should be paid to Accession Countries. 
87 

OJ C 

88 

OJ ... 

89 

OJ … 

90 

OJ…. 

91 

OJ…. 

221



(5) Research activities carried out within this programme should respect the fundamental 
ethical principles, notably those which appear in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of 
the European Union. 
(6) Following the Commission Communication “Women and Science”92 and the 
Resolution of the Council93 and the European Parliament94 on this theme, an action 
plan is being implemented in order to reinforce and increase the place and role of 
women in science and research. 
(7) This programme should be implemented in a flexible, efficient and transparent 
manner, taking account of relevant needs of JRC’s users and Community policies, as 
well as respecting the objective of protecting the communities financial interests. The 
research activities carried out under it should be adapted where appropriate to these 
needs and to scientific and technological developments. 
(8) The JRC should implement the research and training activities carried out by means of 
direct action, in particular the tasks entrusted to the Commission by the Treaty. The 
Commission should undertake the tasks incumbent upon it in the area of nuclear 
fission, making use of the technical expertise of the JRC. 
(9) The JRC should actively pursue activities in innovation and technology transfer. 
(10) In the implementation of this programme, the Board of Governors of the JRC should 
be consulted by the Commission in accordance with the relevant provisions of 
Commission Decision 96/282/Euratom of 10 April 1996 on the reorganisation of the 
JRC95. 
(11) The Commission should in due course arrange for an independent assessment to be 
conducted concerning the activities carried out in the fields covered by this 
programme. 
(12) The Scientific and Technical Committee has been consulted on the scientific and 
technological content of this specific programme. 
(13) The Board of Governors of the JRC has been consulted on the scientific and 
technological content of this specific programme, 
HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: 

Article 1 

1. In accordance with Decision […] on the framework programme 2002-2006 
(hereinafter referred to as “the framework programme”), a specific programme 
related to direct action of research and training activities to be carried out by the Joint 
Research Centre (hereinafter referred to as "the specific programme") is hereby 
adopted for the period from […] to 31 December 2006. 
92 

COM (1999) 76 

93 

Resolution of 20 May 1999, OJ C 201, 16.7.1999 

94 

Resolution of 3 February 2000, PE 284.656 

95 

OJ L 107, 30.4.1996, p. 12. 

222



2. The objectives and scientific and technological priorities for the specific programme 
are set out in Annex I. 
Article 2 

In accordance with Annex II to [Decision […/…] / the framework programme, the amount 
deemed necessary for the execution of the specific programme is EUR 330 290 million. An 
indicative breakdown of this amount is given in Annex II to this Decision. 

Article 3 

1. The Commission shall be responsible for the implementation of the specific 
programme. 
2. The specific programme shall be implemented in accordance with the specific rules 
set out in Annex III. 
Article 4 

1. The Commission shall draw up a work programme for the implementation of the 
specific programme, which shall be made available to all interested parties, setting 
out in greater detail the objectives and priorities, the timetable for implementation 
and the implementation arrangements. 
2. The work programme shall take account of relevant research activities carried out by 
the Member States, Associated States, European and international organisations. It 
shall be updated where appropriate. 
Article 5 

1. For the purposes of implementing the specific programme, the Board of Governors 
of the JRC shall be consulted by the Commission in accordance with Commission 
Decision 96/284/Euratom. 
2. The Commission shall regularly inform the Board of Governors of the 
implementation of this specific programme. 
Article 6 

1. The Commission shall regularly report on the overall progress of the implementation 
of the specific programme, in accordance with Article 4 of the framework 
programme. 
2. The Commission shall arrange for the independent assessment provided for in Article 
5 of the framework programme to be conducted concerning the activities carried out 
in the fields covered by the specific programme. 
223



Article 7 

The Commission may request the JRC to execute, on the basis of the criterion of mutual 
benefit, projects with legal entities established in third countries when this contributes 
effectively to the execution of direct actions. 

Article 8 

This decision is addressed to the Member States. 

Done at Brussels, 

For the Council 
The President 

224



ANNEX I


SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL OBJECTIVES AND BROAD OUTLINES OF


THE ACTIVITIES 

1. INTRODUCTION 
The Joint Research Centre carries out its mission to provide customer-driven scientific and 
technical support for the conception, development, implementation and monitoring of 
European Union policies. It serves the common interest of the Member States while being 
independent of special interests, private or national. 

The JRC’s contribution to the framework programme 2002-2006 incorporates 
recommendations of recent evaluations of the JRC96 and requirements necessitated by the 
Reform of the Commission. In particular, it includes 

– As strengthened user-orientation. 
– Networking activities to create a broad knowledge base and, in the spirit of the 
European Research Area (ERA), more closely associate Member State laboratories, 
industry and regulators in the S&T support provided to the EU policies. 
– The concentration of activities on selected themes, including training of researchers 
to maintain nuclear expertise in the EU and its associated member states. 
Co-ordination will be assured with the indirect actions under the Euratom specific 
programme. 

It responds to clearly expressed needs and requirements, notably from the Commission 
services, which have been identified, are updated through systematic and regular contacts97. 

In its domains of competence, the JRC’s contribution will aim at establishing synergies with 
the relevant thematic priorities in the other specific programmes, notably through 
participation in the indirect action, with a view to add value, when appropriate, to the work 
carried out therein (e.g. through the comparison and validation of tests and methods or the 
integration of results for policy-making purpose). 

2. PROGRAMME CONTENT 
2.1 Motivation 
JRC’s activities in the nuclear area aim to support related Community policies and specific 
Treaty obligations entrusted to the Commission. Nuclear energy supplies about a third of the 
Community’s electricity and vigilance is still required to ensure a continuation of the 
Community’s outstanding safety record, to maintain efforts to avoid proliferation and to 
efficiently manage the processing and long-term storage of waste. The Enlargement of the 

96 

Davignon Report (2000), 5-year assessment of JRC (2000), 1999 JRC Scientific Audit, Prioritisation 
Audit 2001. 

97 

Annual user workshops, interservice group of user DGs, bilateral agreement, etc. 

225



Union together with the needs of safeguarding material arising from the disarmament process 
or the emergence of new technological developments introduce new challenges. 

Focusing its activities in areas where Community involvement is appropriate, the JRC 
operates where its pan-European identity provides an added-value and where its action is 
justified by the cross-border aspects of nuclear safety and security or by public concern about 
the issues: safeguards, non-proliferation, radio-active waste management, reactor safety and 
radiation monitoring will be the key areas. 

The principal objective will be to further develop collaboration through networking, leading 
to broad consensus on a range of these issues at European and world-level. The application of 
Safeguards by the Euratom Safeguards Office (ESO) and the IAEA requires R&D support 
and direct assistance. Special attention will be given to co-operation with future EU Member 
States. Training activities will be an important component for JRC to help equip the EU with 
a future generation of scientists with necessary nuclear skills and expertise. Main areas of 
research activity will therefore be as follows: 

– Radio-active waste management and safeguarding nuclear materials. 
– Safety of present and innovative the different types of reactors, radiation monitoring 
and metrology medical applications from nuclear research. 
2.2. Radio-active waste management and safeguarding nuclear materials 
Spent fuel and high level waste treatment and storage 

To address the issues of spent nuclear fuels and radio-active waste treatment and 
management, the JRC will further develop its understanding of fundamental 
physical, chemical and materials science data on actinides and actinide-containing 
products. The JRC will continue to provide basic nuclear data (such as elements 
cross sections, behaviour in extreme conditions) of importance for waste 
management studies as well as for material and medical sciences. 

The basic processes governing the behaviour of irradiated fuel under conditions of 
interim storage or long term geological disposal will be further investigated. 

The JRC will continue to test and evaluate processes to improve the efficient 
separation (partitioning) of radio-toxic elements from spent fuel and the subsequent 
reprocessing of the resulting products. This will be carried out with European 
partners under the transmutation and partitioning programme. Besides this 
experimental and theoretical approach JRC will pursue and extend its participation in 
networks with a possible co-ordinating role like in the international working group 
on fuel design for the accelerator driven systems. 

Nuclear Safeguards 

The safeguards work will provide direct support to the inspectorates (ESO and 
IAEA) and to operators and will undertake related underpinning research to prepare 
for future demands including continuous improvements of safeguards activities to 
adapt to political context, in particular changes in verification regimes, and 
technological evolution. The activity includes the development and assessment of 
instrumentation in the areas of destructive and non-destructive assays; provision of 
certified reference materials, containment and surveillance, training of inspectors and 

226



the upgrading and operation of on-site laboratories. JRC will continue to be the focus 
point of the European Safeguards Research and Development Association 
(ESARDA) network. 

The strengthening of the safeguard regime is increasingly reliant on information 
technologies to improve efficiency and to carry out new measures. JRC will pursue 
its efforts in developing environmental monitoring, satellite monitoring, and 
innovative data and information management systems as well as improved 
communications and remote surveillance techniques that enable certain safeguards 
activities to be performed remotely from headquarters. Synergy with the work 
performed by JRC in the area of anti-fraud will be further developed. 

The JRC will continue to support the transfer of the technological “acquis 
communautaire” in the safeguards area to the Applicant Countries. 

The JRC is closely involved in the international efforts to detect clandestine activities 
and to combat the illicit trafficking of nuclear materials. Nuclear forensic science 
will be further developed. 

From nuclear safeguards to non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 

The JRC will support the non-proliferation by adapting specialised know-how and 
techniques used for nuclear safeguards that may also potentially support verification 
regimes of nuclear and other weapons for mass destruction. 

2.3 Safety of present and innovative the different types of reactors, radiation 
monitoring and metrology medical applications from nuclear research 
Safety of present and innovative the different types of reactors 

The high safety level of plants within the EU must be maintained, in particular for 
reactors to be operated for a further 10-50 years. The JRC will continue supporting 
safety authorities and nuclear plant operators by networking on ageing, damage 
detection, in-service inspection and structural integrity assessment and production of 
fundamental neutron data. Accident analysis and management, validation of codes, 
systems’ analysis, and risk-informed methods development are traditional JRC 
competencies, which are important both for EU harmonisation and in view of 
enlargement. Support to the PHEBUS programme will continue. Retrieval of 
experimental data and their archiving for easy availability will be supported. 

Development of a common safety culture in Central & Eastern European Countries is 
a further area for JRC support; this includes operational safety measures and plant 
upgrading, structural integrity, accident prevention and management. 

On the safety of nuclear fuel, JRC will concentrate on mechanical and chemical 
interactions at the fuel/cladding interface and on fuel behaviour at high burn-up. The 
TRANSURANUS fuel performance codes will continue to be extended with new 
data and training of users, including scientists from Eastern European countries. 

Together with industry and R&D institutions, the JRC will contribute to the analysis 
and evaluation of several safety features of new the different types of energy 
production systems, currently under investigation in several countries. 

227



Radiation monitoring and metrology 

Research into understanding how to protect the citizen and the environment against 
the effects of ionising radiation requires reliable dosimetry as a basis. The JRC's 
long-standing expertise in radio-protection and metrology will be further oriented 
towards this subject. its reference laboratory for radionuclide metrology will be 
used to develop further skills and various nuclear measurements. 

The radionuclide metrology activity includes new networks, which will provide 
support to nuclear safety together with food, chemical and environmental safety 
(with the detection of radioactivity traces and speciation). Efforts will focus on 
reference radionuclide metrology and on monitoring of low radiation levels. 

Radionuclide metrology will focus on reference measurements and the 
development of international standards for reference radioactivity 
measurements. Additionally, support to nuclear safety and safeguards, 
radiation monitoring according to the Treaty, and the measurement of ultra low 
levels of radiation will be carried out. 

JRC expertise in radioactivity trace analysis and speciation will be further 
developed in the context of environment protection. 

Medical applications from nuclear research 

A number of nuclear technologies of importance for medical applications have 
resulted from JRC’s nuclear facilities and expertise. These emerge from research on 
new isotope production, development of clinical reference materials and support to 
diagnostic and therapeutic tools. The JRC will improve the co-ordination of such 
activities throughout Europe through networking with universities, nuclear research 
facilities, research centres, European medical associations and the pharmaceutical 
industry. 

228



ANNEX II
INDICATIVE BREAKDOWN OF THE AMOUNT


Activity Amount (€ million) 
Radio-active waste management and 
safeguarding nuclear materials 
Safety of present and innovative the 
different types of reactors, radiation 
monitoring and metrology medical 
applications from nuclear research 
Staff necessary for the monitoring of the 
decommissioning of JRC obsolete 
installations 
213 186M€ 
102 89M€ 
15 M€ 
Total 330 290M€98 99 

98 

Of which approximately 6% may be allocated to exploratory research and up to 2% for exploitation of 
own JRC results and technology transfer. 

99 

This total includes the JRC’s budget contribution necessary for its participation in indirect actions. 

229 


ANNEX III 

SPECIFIC RULES FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAMME 

1. The Commission, after consulting the Board of Governors of the JRC, shall 
implement the direct action on the basis of the scientific objectives and contents 
described in Annex I. The activities relating to this action shall be performed in the 
relevant institutes of the Joint Research Centre (JRC). 
2. In the implementation of its activities, the JRC will, whenever appropriate and 
feasible, participate in or organise networks of public and private laboratories in the 
Member States or European research consortia in the support of the European policy 
making process. Particular attention shall be paid to co-operation with industry, 
especially with small and medium-sized enterprises. Research bodies established in 
third countries may also co-operate on projects, in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of Article 6 and, where applicable, of agreements for scientific and 
technological co-operation between the Community and the third countries 
concerned. Particular attention will be paid to co-operation with research laboratories 
and institutes in the Candidate countries and countries of Central and Eastern Europe 
and the former Soviet Union. 
It will also use appropriate mechanisms to continuously identify the requirements 
and needs of its customers and users and to involve them in the related activities. 

3. The knowledge gained through implementation of the projects will be disseminated 
by the JRC itself (taking into account possible limitations due to confidentiality 
issues). 
4. The accompanying measures shall include: 
– the organisation of the visits of JRC staff to national laboratories, industrial 
laboratories and universities, 
– the promotion of mobility of young scientists, particularly from the Candidate 
countries, 
– specialised training with the emphasis on the nuclear expertise and the nuclear 
safety culture in the European Union, 
– the organisation of visits to JRC institutes of visiting scientists and seconded 
national experts, particularly from the Candidate countries, 
– systematic exchange of information, through, inter alia, the organisation of 
scientific seminars, workshops and colloquiums and scientific publications, 
– the independent scientific and strategic evaluation of the performance of the 
projects and programmes. 
230



FINANCIAL STATEMENT


Policy area(s): RESEARCH
Activity(ies): Direct Action


TITLE OF ACTION: 

PROPOSAL FOR A COUNCIL DECISION ADOPTING A SPECIFIC PROGRAMME FOR RESEARCH AND 
TRAINING TO BE CARRIED OUT BY THE JOINT RESEARCH CENTRE BY MEANS OF DIRECT 
ACTIONS FOR THE EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY (2002 TO 2006) 

1. BUDGET LINE(S) + HEADING(S) 
B6-111: Persons associated with the institution 
B6-121: Resources 
B6-3: Joint Research Centre -Direct Operating Appropriations -EAEC framework 

programme (2002 TO 2006) 

2. OVERALL FIGURES 
2.1 Total allocation for action (Part B): 330 290 € million for commitment 
2.2 Period of application: 
2002 to 2006 

2.3 Overall multiannual estimate on expenditure: 
a) Schedule of commitment appropriations/payment appropriations (financial intervention) (see 
point 6.1.1) 

€ million (to 3rd decimal place) 

Years 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 
and 
subs. 
years 
Total 
Commitments 
Payments 

b) Technical and administrative assistance and support expenditure (see point 6.1.2) 

Commitments 
Payments 

231



Subtotala+bCommitmentsPayments
c) Overall financial impact of human resources and other administrative expenditure 

(see points 7.2 and 7.3) 

Commitments 81.9 82.4 82.8 82.9 330 
70.6 71.9 73.0 74.5 290 
Payments 66.7 77.6 82.6 103.1 330 
58.6 68.0 72.8 90.6 290 

TOTAL a+b+c 
Commitments 81.9 82.4 82.8 82.9 330 
70.6 71.9 73.0 74.5 290 
Payments 66.7 77.6 82.6 103.1 330 
58.6 68.0 72.8 90.6 290 

2.4 Compatibility with the financial programming and the financial perspective 
. Proposal compatible with the existing financial programming 
. This proposal will entail reprogramming of the relevant heading in the financial 
perspective. 
. This may entail application of the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement. 
2.5 Financial impact on revenue100: 
. No financial implications (involves technical aspects regarding implementation of 
a measure) 
OR 

. Financial impact – the effect on revenue is as follows: 
€ million (to 1 decimal place) 

Budget line Revenue 
Prior to 
action 
(Year 
n-1) Year n 
Situation following action 
n+1 n+2 n+3 n+4 n+5 
a) Revenue in absolute terms 
b) Change in Revenue D 

For further information see a separate guidance paper 

232



3. BUDGET CHARACTERISTICS
Type of expenditure New EFTA 
participation 
Participation 
applicant 
countries 
Heading 
Financial 
Perspective 
Non-comp Diff YES NO YES N° 3 

4. LEGAL BASIS 
Articles 7 and 8 of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). 

Council Decision …/../Euratom adopting the framework programme 2002-2006 of the European 
Atomic Energy Community for research and training activities aimed at contributing towards the 
creation of the European Research Area (OJ L …). 

5. DESCRIPTION AND GROUNDS 
5.1 Need for Community intervention 101 
5.1.1 Objectives pursued 
The JRC’s mission is to provide scientific and technical support for the formulation, 
implementation and monitoring of EU policies. As a service of the European 
Commission, the JRC functions as a reference centre of science and technology for the 
Union. Close to the policy-making process, it serves the common interest of the 
Member States while remaining independent of commercial or national interests. 

Nuclear energy continues to supply about a third of Europe’s electricity, and vigilance is 
still required to ensure a continuation of Europe’s outstanding safety record, to maintain 
efforts to avoid proliferation and to efficiently manage the processing and long-term 
storage of waste. New challenges include a reactor population whose average age is 
increasing, an enlargement of the Union to include countries with a different safety 
culture, and the coming into safeguards of material arising from the disarmament 
process. 

The principal objective will be to further develop collaboration through networking 
leading to broad consensus on a range of these issues at European and world-level. The 
application of Safeguards by the Euratom Safeguards Office (ESO) and the IAEA 
requires R&D support and direct assistance. Special attention will be given to cooperation with future EU Member States. Training activities will be an important 
component for JRC to help equip the EU with a future generation of scientists with 
necessary nuclear skills and expertise. 

5.1.2 Measures taken in connection with evaluation 
The JRC programme is regularly reviewed through scientific audits and the 5-yearassessments. Annual programme presentations to the other services of the Commission 
are organised. A high level user group composed by representative of customer 

For further information see a separate guidance paper 

233



Commission’s DGs has been set up with a view to establishing and reviewing priorities 
in close connectionwithpolicyneeds. 

The Scientific Audit of the JRC Institutes, launched in 1999, was designed to provide 
early advice and feedback to the JRC management on the scientific standing of the 
institutes, and an assessment of their scientific strengths and weaknesses, both in terms 
of staff and other resources, for the implementation of the new programme. The chief 
objective was to ensure that the execution of the framework programme 1998-2002 
could be performed with the requisite scientific quality. The Scientific Audit’s overall 
conclusions confirmed the soundness of JRC’s scientific strategies and the validity of its 
new mission: 

“The Audit Team considers the development of the JRC nuclear a true success story and 
sees in its excellent networking practices a clear and leading example of subsidiarity 
and leadership to be expected of a European research institution.” 

The 5-Year-Assessment (5YA) exercise, input required by legislation before the tabling 
by the Commission of proposal for the framework programme 2002-2006, was carried 
out in 2000. Given that scientific issues had already been addressed in the Scientific 
Audit, the main focus of the 5YA was the management aspects of the JRC activities, the 
impact of the JRC support to the EU policies, and the delivered results in relation to the 
adopted programmes. The resulting recommendations were dominated by the overriding 
statement that the new mission of the JRC must be maintained and its implementation 
assured in all aspects and consequences: 

“The important work of the JRC in the nuclear domain on safeguarding, plant safety and 
on the safe and acceptable management of waste must not be allowed to decline in view 
of the European Union’s 30% nuclear energy production.” 

In January 2000, Research Commissioner Philippe Busquin established a High Level 
Panel chaired by Viscount Etienne Davignon, with the task to review and to make 
recommendations on the workings of the JRC. The Davignon Report was issued in July 
2000. The High Level Panel endorses the mission assigned to the JRC by the 5th RTD 
Framework Programme and finds that it has a clear long-term role. It proposes opening 
it up to the other Community institutions and contains a number of organisational 
suggestions. It recommends that the JRC should not dissipate its efforts, but should do 
more to focus its activities, promote intense networking with other European centres of 
excellence and attaches particular importance to nuclear activities. 

Finally, in July 2000 the Commission’s Peer Group, appointed earlier in the year to 
make a political overview of the Institution’s activities and bring them in line with the 
human resources it had available, published a report in which a series of actions were 
identified. 

In response to the various evaluations, the JRC has undertaken a strategy for 
concentrating its activities into some core competence areas and has identified possible 
reduction of activities across its structure with the launch of an Activity Prioritisation 
Audit, the results of which have been published internally on April 2, 2001. An 
interservice consultation is being prepared in view of a Communication to the 
Commission that should disseminate the results of this evaluation to the rest of the 
Commission services. 

234



5.2 Actions envisaged 
The JRC programme forms part of the framework programme, which meets the 
objectives set out in Articles 7 and 8 of the Euratom Treaty. 

The JRC’s participation in the field of action covered by this proposal is commensurate 
with its capabilities and attributes and complies with the principle of subsidiarity. 

The target population is Europe’s scientific and industrial community and that 
concerned with the various sectoral policies of the Commission in which the JRC is 
required to provide its support. 

This research and training programme is structured around two major areas: 

(a) Radio-active waste management and safeguarding nuclear materials 
Spent fuel and high level waste treatment and storage 

To address the issues of spent nuclear fuels and radio-active waste, the JRC will further 
develop the characterisation of actinides and actinide-containing products, and will 
continue to provide basic nuclear data. 

The basic processes governing the behaviour of irradiated fuel under conditions of 
direct long-term disposal will be investigated with priority. 

The JRC will continue to test and evaluate processes of efficient separation and burning 
(partitioning and transmutation) of radio-toxic elements from spent fuel. 

Euratom and IAEA Safeguards 

The safeguards of nuclear materials include services to the Safeguards Inspectorates 
(ESO and IAEA) and related underpinning research. 

The JRC will continue to support the transfer of technology for Euratom Safeguards 
applications in the Applicant Countries. 

Nuclear forensic science will be further developed to detect clandestine activities and to 
combat the illicit trafficking of nuclear materials. 

Support to non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction will benefit from the JRC 
experience, in the nuclear and other fields, to support the fundamental objectives of the 
Union’s security policy. 

(b) Safety of present and innovative the different types of reactors, radiation 
monitoring and medical applications from nuclear research metrology 
Safety of present and innovative the different types of reactors 

The high safety level of existing nuclear plants within the EU must be maintained. The 
JRC will continue, through well-established networks, to work on fuel safety, ageing, 
damage detection, in-service inspection, structural integrity and assessment, accident 
analysis and management (support to PHEBUS), validation of codes, systems’ analysis 
and risk-informed methods. Development of a common safety culture in Central & 
Eastern European Countries is a further area for JRC support. 

235



Together with industry and R&D institutions, the JRC will contribute to the analysis 
and evaluation of safety and security features of new the different types of energy 
production systems, currently under investigation in several countries. 

Radiation monitoring 

The JRC’s long-standing expertise in radio-protection and its advanced laboratory for 
radioactivity measurements will be used to develop traces detection and analysis 
methods, dosimetric skills and various nuclear reference measurements. 

Medical applications from nuclear research 

A number of nuclear technologies of importance for medical applications have resulted 
from JRC’s nuclear facilities and expertise. These emerge from research on new isotope 
production, development of clinical reference materials and support to new cancer 
therapies. The JRC will improve the co-ordination of such activities throughout Europe 
through networking with universities, research centres, European medical associations 
and the pharmaceutical industry. 

5.3 Methods of implementation 
Direct Action of the JRC institutes: 

– Institute for Advanced Materials Energy (IAMIE) 
– Institute for Transuranium Elements (ITU) 
– Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM) 
– Institute for Systems, Informatics and Safety the Protection and the Security of 
the Citizen (ISISIPSC) 
6. FINANCIAL IMPACT 
6.1 Total financial impact on Part B -(over the entire programming period) 
(The method of calculating the total amounts set out in the table below must be explained by the 
breakdown in Table 6.2. ) 

236



6.1.1 Financial intervention 
Commitments in € million (to the 3rd decimal place) 

Breakdown 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 and 
subs. 
years 
Total 
Radio-active Waste 
52.900 53.200 53.400 53.500 213.000 
Management and Safeguards 
45.300 46.200 46.800 47.700 186.000 
Safety of present and innovative 
25.300 25.3500 25.600 25.600 102.000 
the different types of reactors, 
radiation monitoring and 21.700 22.000 22.400 22.900 89.000 
metrology medical applications 
from nuclear research 
Staff necessary for the 
3.700 3.700 3.800 3.800 15.000 
monitoring of the 
decommissioning of JRC 3.600 3.900 
obsolete installations 
TOTAL 81.900 82.400 82.800 82.900 330.000. 
70.600 71.900 73.000 74.500 290.000 

6.1.2 Technical and administrative assistance, support expenditure and IT expenditure 
Commitment appropriations) 
Year N N +1 N + 2 N +3 N + 4 N +5 and 
subs. 
years 
Total 
1) Technical and 
administrative assistance 
a) Technical assistance offices 
b) Other technical and 
administrative assistance: 
-intra muros : 
-extra muros : 
of which for construction and 
maintenance of computerised 
management systems 
Subtotal 1 
2) Support expenditure 
a) Studies 
b) Meetings of experts 
c) Information and 
publications 
Subtotal 2 
TOTAL 

237



6.2 Calculation of costs by measure envisaged in Part B (over the entire 
programming period)102 
(Where there is more than one action, give sufficient detail of the specific measures to be 
taken for each one to allow the volume and costs of the outputs to be estimated. ). 

Commitments in € million (to the 3rd decimal place) 

Breakdown Type 
of outputs 
(projects, files ) 
Number of 
outputs 
(total for years 
1…n) 
Average unit 
cost 
Total cost 
(total for years 
1…n) 
1 2 3 4=(2X3) 
Radio-active Waste Management 
and Safeguards 
Safety of present and innovative 
the different types of reactors, 
radiation monitoring and medical 
applications from nuclear research 
metrology 
Staff necessary for the monitoring 
of the decommissioning of JRC 
obsolete installations 
TOTAL COST 330.000 290.000 

If necessary explain the method of calculation 

7. IMPACT ON STAFF AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE 
7.1 Impact on human resources 
Types of post 
Staff to be assigned to management of 
the action using existing and/or 
additional resources Total 
Description of tasks deriving 
from the action 
Number of 
permanent posts 
Number of 
temporary posts 
Permanent 
officials or 
Temporary staff 
A 
B 
C 
D 
733 
595 
537 
37 
If necessary, a fuller description 
of the tasks may be annexed. 
NDE, Grantholders, 
Visiting Scientists, 
… 
Other human resources 
Total 1,902 

For further information see a separate guidance paper 
238 


In 2002, the JRC will have a single staff table of 1,902 posts distributed as follows: 733 Aposts, 595 B-posts, 537 C-posts and 37 D-posts103. The staff is managed as a single group: 
staff can be put allocated to both nuclear and non-nuclear activities. The ratio of nuclear to 
total staff is variable during the period of execution of the framework programme. This ratio 
is of the order of 1/3. A relatively large number of short-term scientific posts are also financed 
as non-statutory staff (about 200). Their status can be grantholders, scientific visitors, national 
experts on secondment… 

7.2 Overall financial impact of human resources 
Type of human resources 
Amount EUR 
millions 
Method of calculation * 
Officials 
Temporary staff 
Other human resources 
(give budget line) 
Total 50.3 44.9 

The amounts are total expenditure for twelve months. 

The different resources: staff, material, specific credits are distributed to remain within the 
given envelope. The staff credits have been allocated after taking the minimum needs for 
infrastructure into account and deciding on a minimum level of specific credits for the 
execution of projects and for networking. The staff budget is reduced compared to that of the 
fifth framework programme 1998-2002 and a significant staff reduction (150 posts)is 
necessary. This reduction will depend on the evolution of salaries during the period 20032006 and of the evolution of the required competencies: ratio between A/B/C/D staff. 

7.3 Other administrative expenditure deriving from the action 
Budget line 
(number and heading) 
Amount € Method of calculation 
Overall allocation (Title A7) 
A0701 – Missions 
A07030 – Meetings 
A07031 – Compulsory committees (1) 
A07032 – Non-compulsory committees (1) 
A07040 – Conferences 
A0705 – Studies and consultations 
… Other expenditure (state which) 
Information systems (A-5001/A-4300) 
Other expenditure -Part A (state which) 
Total 

This compares with the current (2001) staff table of 2080 1902 posts. As in the past this envelope of 
statutory posts constitutes a separate staff table and represents the maximum statutory staff, which may 
be engaged. However the number of staff employed in practice depends on the availability of financial 
resources (institutional credits, competitive income and other possible sources of revenue). 

239 


The amounts are total expenditure for twelve months. 

(1) Specify the type of committee and the group to which it belongs. 
I. Annual total (7.2 + 7.3) € 
II. Duration of action Years 
III. Total cost of action (I x II) € 

(In the estimate of human and administrative resources required for the action, DGs/Services 
must take into account the decisions taken by the Commission in its orientation debate and 
when adopting the preliminary draft budget (PDB). This means that DGs must show that 
human resources can be covered by the indicative pre-allocation made when the PDB was 
adopted. 

Exceptional cases, where the action concerned could not be foreseen when the PDB was 
being prepared, will have to be referred to the Commission for a decision on whether and 
how (by means of an amendment of the indicative pre-allocation, an ad hoc redeployment 
exercise, a supplementary/amending budget or a letter of amendment to the draft budget) 
implementation of the proposed action can be accepted.) 

8. FOLLOW-UP AND EVALUATION 
Each year, with the help of appropriately qualified independent experts, the Commission will 
examine the implementation of specific programme 2002-2006. It will, in particular, assess 
whether the objectives, priorities and financial resources are still appropriate to the changing 
situation. Where appropriate, it will submit proposals to adapt or supplement the specific 
programme 2002-2006. 

The Commission produces an annual report on the activities of the Joint Research Centre. 
These reports are sent to the European Parliament, the Council and the Economic and Social 
Committee. 

9. ANTI-FRAUD MEASURES 
When the implementation of the programme calls for the use of external contractors or 
implies granting financial contributions to third parties, the Commission will carry out, where 
appropriate, financial audits, in particular if it has reasons to doubt the realistic nature of work 
performed or described in the activity reports. 

The Community's financial audits will be carried out either by its own staff or by accounting 
experts approved according to the law of the audited party. The Community will chose the 
latter freely, while avoiding any risks of conflicts of interest which might be indicated to it by 
the party subject to the audit. 

In addition, the Commission will make sure in carrying out the research activities, that the 
financial interests of the European Communities are protected by effective checks and, in case 
of detected irregularities, measures as well as deterrent and proportionate sanctions. 

In order to achieve this aim, rules on checks, measures and sanctions, with references to the 
Regulations No 2988/95,02185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 will be taken up in all contracts used 
in the implementation of the programme. 

In particular, the following points will have to be provided for in the contracts : 

240



– the introduction of specific contractual clauses to protect the financial interests of the 
EC in carrying out checks and controls in relation to the work performed; 

– the participation of administrative checks in the field of fraud-fighting, in accordance 
with Regulations No 2185/96, 1073/99 and 1074/99 ; 
– the application of administrative sanctions for all intentional or negligent 
irregularities in the implementation of the contracts, in accordance with the 
framework Regulation No 2988/95, including a black listing mechanism ; 
– the fact that possible recovery orders in case of irregularities and fraud be 
enforceable according to Article 164 of the EAEC Treaty. 
In addition and as routine measures, an internal audit and control programme in respect of 
scientific and budgetary aspects, will be carried out by the JRC staff responsible; internal 
audit carried out by the JRC Internal audit Unit; and local inspections by this Unit and the 
Court of Auditors. 

241



