annual report 
2004 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE 
FOR RESEARCH 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE 
AND CONTROL 

THE FRENCH 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE 
FOR RESEARCH 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE 
AND CONTROL 

contents 
The President’s message 
INRIA, a strategy of excellence 
¦ International outlook 
¦ A wealth of scientific outputs 
¦ Fruitful dialog between research and innovation 
¦ 6 research units, competence centers 
in the regions 
¦ The means for growth 
Organization chart 
Councils 
10 researchers tales 
The 124 research project-teams 
2 
4 
6 
8 
18 
26 
34 
38 
39 
40 
62 
INRIA was founded in 1967 (it was then called IRIA). 
The Institute is a public establishment of scientific and 
technological character (EPST) placed under the dual authority 
of the Ministries of Research and Industry. 
3, 6 research units located in 
Aquitaine, Bretagne, Lorraine, Île-de-France, 
Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur, 
Rhône-Alpes, and in interaction with their region. 
a staff of 
3,500,including 2,700 scientists 
(INRIA and partner organizations) 
1,800 persons on INRIA payroll 
124 research project-teams 
Budget 
1 123 million euros exclusive of tax, including 
22% in self-resources 

Due to the quality of its research scientists and the excel-
lence of their work, the Institute stands out as a major 
contributor to many European and international projects. 
In basic research, applied research and technology 
transfer, INRIA intends to participate in a continuous flux 
of innovations in the field of ICST. The growing importance 
of information technology in all scientific disciplines and 
in most economic activities prompted the Institute to 
commit itself to a strategy of research in partnership 
with numerous organizations. More than half of the 
124 project-teams of the Institute are joint projects 
with CNRS, the engineering schools, the universities and 
other research institutes. The Institute is also working 
with the large industrial R&D departments. Research 
in computer science is thus led in close proximity with 
the needs in telecommunications, medicine, biology, 
transportation, and so on. 
INRIA, the French National Institute for 
Research in Computer Science and Control, 
is one of France's main assets in the 
international challenge of information and 
communication science and technology. 
This strategy of closeness results in a dynamic transfer 
activity of research results through software publication 
and distribution and the creation of startups supported 
by INRIA's subsidiary --INRIA-Transfert. 
INRIA has contributed to the creation of many companies 
during the last twenty years: from the pioneering Simulog 
founded in 1984 to Genostar founded in 2004, and 
including Ilog, listed on the Euronext, Nasdaq and Kelkoo. 
Around forty such companies are currently active and 
others have been integrated into large industrial groups. 
Training and information distribution are part of the 
Institute's assignments. The 3,500 INRIA collaborators, 
including 2,700 scientists, contribute to these goals with 
the desire to share their scientific curiosity, their passion 
for research and their knowledge with the world around them. 


The President’s


message


Gilles Kahn 


Gilles Kahn is a scientist of international renown. 
He is a specialist in programming environments 
and computer proof environments. His training 
and career led him from the École polytechnique 
(X64) to INRIA, which he joined in 1977, 
with various stays at Stanford University, 
USA (1968-1971), the University of Edinburgh, 
UK (1975-1976), the Isaac Newton Institute, 
Cambridge, UK (1995). 
At INRIA, Gilles Kahn participated in the creation 
of the Sophia Antipolis research unit before 
joining the Institute general management. 
He became INRIA's Scientific Director in 1993. 
Gilles Kahn was appointed Chairman of the 
Institute's Board of Directors in May 2004. 
Gilles Kahn is a member of the Academy of 
Sciences, of the Academy of Technology and the 
Academia Europea. He also belongs to many 
scientific boards of companies and research 
organizations (Onera, BRGM, CNES, EDF, Ilog, etc.) 
in France and abroad. 


The President’s message 


The year 2004 began with the examination of the results of 
the previous contract period (2000-2003) by a very high level 
international evaluation committee. The positive and constructive 
conclusions drawn by this committee form the basis for the 
definition of a new contract with the Government. Fortified by this 
evaluation, INRIA worked hard in 2004 and the present annual 
report is proof of a sustained scientific production, the creation of 
new projects, and the progress of FUTURS with our university 
partners in Bordeaux, Lille and Saclay. The subdivision of INRIA 
activity into themes has been entirely revised and now highlights 
the strategic interest of the Institute in life sciences and 
the health sector. INRIA reinforced its Scientific Management 
with the arrival of a new vice President for Research, Professor 
Jean Vuillemin and the setting-up of four working groups for 
prospective and analysis that involve over forty INRIA scientists. 

The efficiency of research organization is one of the topics that 
was discussed on the national level and INRIA deems it be of 
paramount importance. The implementation of a computerized 
management system required much mobilization on the part of 
INRIA staff. The decision to deploy the system at the beginning of 
2005 was made irrevocably. Owing to the collective efforts 
expended for such a complex transition, the Institute will be in a 
better position to face the changes in research organization that 
we can see dawning on the horizon in France and in Europe. 
Various items were reinforced, among which organization of 
computer resources, training of INRIA personnel, support to 
software development, communication on INRIA research work, 
and support to research projects in terms of contractual 
relations. A reform of the Institute's statutory decree that had 
been in the works for a long time is about to be adopted: we will 
thus now be able to spend more time studying the best 

application files for research positions at INRIA. The Institute is 
evolving towards more decentralization and more responsibility 
exerted closer to the research teams, for a more competent and 
reactive administrative, technical and organizational support. 

What is in store for us in the upcoming years? 
The pace of scientific and technological evolution in Information 
and Communication Science and Technology shows no sign of 
slackening. Industry has picked up from the start of century 
crisis, renewed and quietened down. There are signs that 
company creation is also reviving-good news for an Institute that 
has been active in this area for twenty years. ICST is a crucial 
part of most new scientific and technological developments 
and INRIA must adapt to the growth in needs for knowledge, 
expertise and experimentation in this field, while preserving the 
essential values that form the basis of its action. 


02•03



INRIA: 

a strategy 

of excellence 

Information and communication science and technology 
(ICST) is transforming society. It enters multiple 
areas of daily life, industry and services. Computer 
systems are embedded into common devices-TV 
sets, telephones, cars, supermarket shelves and 
so on. These devices communicate with each other 
via networks and have long been contributing to 
industrial efficiency. Digital advances in all fields are 
accompanied with growing needs in computation, 
algorithms and software intelligence. 


For INRIA, research is not limited to the development 

Evolution, 

fractals and design of information technology products. It must contribute 

Project-team COMPLEX to economic development in all the sectors that 
need it. 

06 INTERNATIONAL 8 FROM THE IDEA 
OUTLOOK TO THE APPLICATION: 

a wealth of scientific productions 


INRIA and its partners must thus propose innovation 
incentives for industry, services and administration. 
Research in information technology contributes to 
a more transparent world in which information is 
available, intelligible and accessible. Research makes 
the realization of new projects and services easier 
via modeling, simulation and visualization. It also 
participates in progress in medical technology, makes 
complex systems secure, contributes to progress in 
environment protection, the understanding of natural 
phenomena and quality of life. 

Thus the development of ICST and its contribution to 
advances in science is leading INRIA into a dynamics 
of development of growth at the service of economy 
and society. This approach delineated into seven 
priority challenges in the Institute's strategic plan 
guides the work of INRIA. 

18 FRUITFUL DIALOG 26 SIX RESEARCH 
BETWEEN UNITS, 
research and innovation regional competence centers 
in the field of ICST 


7 

priority 

scientific challenges 

Design and master 

the future network infrastructures 
and communication services platforms 

Develop 

multimedia data 
and multimedia information processing 

Guarantee 

the reliability and security of software 
intensive systems 

Couple 

models and data to simulate 
and control complex systems 

Combine 

simulation, visualization and interaction 

Model 

the living structures and mechanisms 

Fully integrate 

ICST into medical technology 

34 THE MEANS 
FOR GROWTH 

04•05



INTERNATIONAL 
OUTLOOK 

INRIA's research work is in the context of a dual international perspective. The teams are invited to increase exchanges and partnerships with 
foreign departments. In parallel, each research project-team is evaluated 
by a committee that calls upon the best international research scientists 
in each speciality. The Institute as a whole regularly presents its work 
to an external evaluation committee called the Visiting Committee, 
composed of external French and foreign scientists of note.The last such 
evaluation took place in March 2004. 

This international strategy is one of the Institute's priorities. The objective is to maintain INRIA at the highest level of excellence. This is the 
reason why the Institute kept investing much in this area in 2004. This 
approach has several development directions: reinforcing the attractiveness of the Institute and augmenting its capacity to welcome and recruit 
the best foreign graduates and scientists, developing partnerships with 
the most dynamic academic and industrial departments worldwide. 

INRIA implements this strategy in the framework of geographical priorities. The Institute maintains a strong commitment to the development 
of the European research area. INRIA is one of the major actors of the 
6th Framework Program (FP). In 2004, the Institute was partner to more 
than forty European research initiatives. INRIA is also a founding member of ERCIM, the European Research Consortium for Informatics and 
Mathematics, a one of its kind organization in Europe that regroups 
research organizations in the field of ICST from eighteen European 
countries. INRIA has been and is still participating in several work 
groups initiated by the Europe mission of the Ministry in charge of 
Research in the framework of the preparation of the 7th FP. 

The second priority of INRIA is to reinforce partnerships with research 
departments in the United States. The United States is the most dynamic 
country in ICST research. Forty percent of the projects work in partnership with American teams, in the framework of the “associate teams” 
program. In this context, INRIA favors nine major centers, for example 
at Urbana Champaign and MIT (to welcome interns and for collaborations). Finally, the Institute intends to strengthen its collaborations with 
Asia, which will be a new geographical priority in the years to come. The 
objective of the Institute is to bolster personnel exchanges between 
France and Asia in view of creating strong human and scientific ties 
between INRIA researchers and Asian scientists. INRIA is thus involved 
in several joint research ventures, such the LIAMA in China and the 
Hong Kong Center for financial engineering. 
The Institute is also a driving force in the development of multilateral 
research programs with Brazil, Chile, Mexico and various African countries (project SARIMA). 

Members of the LIAMA 
scientific committee 
Sharing competence with Africanresearch in applied mathematics 

Several INRIA teams are working in close collaboration with African 
researchers in applied mathematics, especially the project-team MERE 
on the modeling of systems in connection with water. INRIA got 
involved with these teams in project SARIMA (support to research 
activities in computer science and mathematics in Africa) which proposes to develop a balanced cooperation model between research 
teams in the North and the South. The main objective is to identify 
and reinforce competence centers in applied mathematics cooperating within a network structure. Seven teams were selected to start 
with as network nodes (five teams from French-speaking sub-Saharan 
countries, one Tunisian team and one Lebanese team). The project 
is supported by the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and will be 
operated in the North by the GIS SARIMA (scientific interest group), 
composed of INRIA, CIMPA and the universities of Nice-Sophia 
Antipolis, Metz and Rennes I. In 2004, SARIMA entered its operational 
phase: INRIA will manage 915,000 euros over a period of three years 
to fund bilateral research projects, researchers exchanges, as well as 
visits of graduate students, doctoral candidates and post-docs in 
expert teams in the North and in the South. 


Associate teams around the world 
The “Associate teams Program” was launched by INRIA in 2001. Its purpose is to reinforce 
synergies between an INRIA team and a foreign team. By bringing in significant funds for 
mobility, the program makes it possible to develop collaborations initiated by the research 
scientists and to strengthen scientific cooperation around a promising project. In 2004, 
twenty-six teams were able to develop exchanges, meetings, bilateral seminars and partici-
pation in international conferences. 
This recent program is being constantly improved. One-and three-year evaluations make it 
possible to measure its impact on research. In December 2004, the evaluation committee thus 
evaluated the eight teams who benefitted from this support for three years. 
35 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
10 8 10 12 
10 
16 
26 
33 
2 5 
Team evolution over 4 years 
02 03 04 05 
. started associate-teams 
. terminated associate-teams 
. total number associate-team 
A reinforced presence 
in China 
The development of special, durable rela-
tions between French and Chinese research 
scientists in the field of ICST is one of 
INRIA's priorities. In 1997, the Institute 
created the Sino-French Laboratory in 
Computer Science, Automation and Applied 
Mathematics (LIAMA) with the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences (CAS). LIAMA kept 
growing in 2004 following the dynamism of 
the Chinese economy that is increasingly in 
demand of innovations in the field of ICST. 
The department boasts around thirty 
Chinese and French research scientists on 
research themes at the interface between 
ICST and environmental problems (plant 
growth simulation and visualization, 
remote image processing and interpreta-
tion, fluid mechanics) and on the promotion 
of free scientific software (Scilab). 
METALAU, an INRIA team, has associated 
itself with LIAMA for the Greenlab project 
whose goal is to develop a dynamical 
model of plant growth. In October 2004, a 
new agreement was signed that reasserted 
LIAMA's ambitions and welcomed two new 
partners, BRGM (French Research Institute 
for Geosciences) and INRA (National 
Institute for Research in Agronomy). Both 
organizations are joining CNRS (French 
National Center for Scientific Research) and 
CIRAD (French Agricultural Research centre 
for International Development) within 
LIAMA. The department is hosted by the 
Institute of Automation of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences (CASIA) in Beijing. 
International outlook 


For example, since 2002 the EPIDAURE team has been working in partnership with the LONI, 
a member of the UCLA School of Medicine, to put together an atlas of the numerous brain 
images resulting from the explosion of brain imaging techniques. EPIDAURE specializes in the 
design of analysis tools for this type of images and thus shares its expertise with a department with experience in the understanding of brain functions. The Sophia Antipolis team thus 
had access to a unique computer platform with immediate onsite help, and was able to share 
the work with other international researchers. 
Similarly, the Dutch researchers of CWI integrated their experience with the PROTHEO team 
of INRIA Lorraine in the field of symbolic systems. There is now a strong synergy between 
the two groups and the quality of the software written after this cooperation underlines the 
driving role of this program. 


5 in Europe (15%) 
3 in Asia (9%) 
1 in Africa (3%) 

24 in Americas (73%) 

Geographical repartition 

Associate teams by zone 

06•07 


From the idea 
to the application: 
a wealth of scientific outputs 
Haptic feedback 
on virtual workbench 
Project-team I3D, 
project RNTL Geobench 
2,600 scientific publications, 25 international conferences, 4,360 attendees including 
3,200 from abroad, 11,500 hours of teaching, 950 doctoral candidates, 
150 postdocs, 300 trainees 

A wealth of scientific outputs 


Research at INRIA is organized into small teams 
--the project-teams --that are created to work 
on precise themes and whose advances are 
regularly evaluated. INRIA also includes other 
research teams, which are not yet acknowledged 
as project-teams. This organizational choice 
turns out to be very productive in the field of 
ITCS where the pace of innovation is very quick. 
The visible part of INRIA research consists 
in softwares, experiments, partnerships and 
publications. 
Here are a few examples that show this work of 
turning ideas into applications carried out by 
INRIA researchers in 2004. 

A WEALTH 
OF SCIENTIFIC OUTPUTS 

3 software packages 

The development and production of application software, validation tools, computational tools and so on, 
give a measure of the variety of INRIA research. More 
than 150 such tools can be found on the www.inria.fr 
site. The Institute has adopted a development strategy 
that emphasizes the widest possible dissemination into 
the academic and industrial worlds. Thus, many INRIA 
software packages contributed to the development of 
international standards that are now recognized, such 
as OLSR in the field of ad hoc mobile networks for 
instance. 
Part of this software is made available to all, primarily 
to researchers, as open source. Other software is 
marketed by INRIA in partnership with industry and 
integrated into various products. 

SPREAD: objects that communicate 

SPREAD (Spatial Programming Environment for Ambient computing 
Design) is a software package developed by the ACES team. The 
purpose of SPREAD is to simplify the development of applications in 
the area of ubiquitous computing. In April 2004, in the framework of 
the Senate's international meeting on prospective on “21st century 
transportations”, the team presented Ubi-Bus, a system based on 
Spread to help vision impaired or low mobility persons use public 
transports. Ubi-Bus makes it possible for users to ask for a bus to stop 
from a simple telephone or a PDA. 

3D object manipulation 
with force feedback 
Project-team SIAMES 
08•09



The application makes extensive use of the new programming 
abstractions proposed by Spread, whose characteristics depend on the 
location in space and allow for spontaneous information exchange 
between physical entities (for example, the bus, the bus stop and the 
user). Ubi-bus runs on a wireless peer-to-peer architecture in which 
each object hosts a copy of the system and the necessary components. 
The application may spawn many others in which city objects could 
exchange information with users. 
Spread was registered by INRIA at the Software Protection Agency 
in March 2003. 

MPFR: the same round-off on any computer 

The MPFR library was developed by research scientists of Loria and 
INRIA Lorraine. MPFR is a set of software tools designed to perform 
floating point operations up to an arbitrary precision with exact round-
off. In a floating point operation, for example 1 divided by 3, the result 
cannot be represented exactly therefore a choice must be made between 
0.33334 and 0.33333. The round-off choice is critical for certain 
applications that require high precision. It sometimes depends however 
on the type of computer that is performing the calculations. Now, the 
execution of any computer program relies on computations: precision 
and portability are important issues in computing. MPFR proposes a 
solution that sets the exactitude of the round-off for all computations 
and all machines. The library is inspired by the IEEE-754 standard, that 
had already settled the matter for other types of computations, the 
so-called double precision computations. MPFR is now available as free 
software under the GNU LGPL license. It can be used by anyone and 
be integrated into commercial software. This is why many software 
developers have adopted MPFR for different applications: critical 
computations, estimate of the numerical stability of an algorithm, 
computation with correct round-off of such mathematical functions as 
the sine, exponential and logarithm, which are not standardized in 
IEEE-754. The latter application was the reason for integrating MPFR 
into the GNU Fortran compiler in July 2004, a significant benefit for 
many numerics experts since most numerical code is written in Fortran. 

www.mpfr.org 

Modeling contacts 
between two infected proteins 
ARC DOCKING - Project-team GÉOMETRICA 
DIET: networked scientific computing 

DIET (Distributed Interactive Engineering Toolbox) is a toolbox for 
remote computing over the Internet on a network of computers (grid 
computing). The toolbox was developed by project-team GRAAL in 
order to implement and validate the algorithms created by the research 
scientists. DIET makes it possible to deploy computing applications 
requiring significant resources, and thus numerous machines, such as 
3D simulations, bioinformatics, and scientific computing. DIET defines 
the user side of things: a web page dedicated to the application where 
parameters can be entered. DIET then chooses the machine that will 
perform the fastest computation through a network of computers. DIET 
offers decisive advantages compared to existing tools in the field, in 
particular the ability to manage an unlimited number of remote 
computers and users. DIET makes it possible to modify the scheduling 
depending on the application. The toolbox has been available since 
September 2004. It was presented at the Super Grid Computing 
meeting in the United States in November 2004 and was well received 
by the scientific community. 
Today, GRAAL researchers intend to endow DIET with new functionalities, in particular the possibility to leave the data on the client machine 
in such a way that the application may change computers freely. 

http://graal.ens-lyon.fr/DIET/ 

3 cooperative research initiatives 

Cooperative research initiatives (ARC) were created by 
INRIA in order to focus the competence of several 
research projects and partner departments on a 
concrete, still prospective but well identified challenge. 
ARCs are evaluated every two years. 

DOCKING: a new tool for biologists 

Docking is the name given to the pairing up of two molecules: a key 
and a lock that correspond to an intercellular communication. This is an 
important issue for biologists. The more proteins are discovered by 
genome decryption, the better scientists would like to know them, in 
particular to identify their pairing potential and its effects. The scale of 
the phenomenon makes it however extremely hard to observe. The 
Docking ARC was thus set up in 2002 by INRIA teams-GÉOMETRICA, 
ÉVASION and ISA-to develop molecular docking visualization and 
analysis tools in partnership with the “Membrane assembly dynamics” 
team of CNRS. 
At the end of 2004, the Docking ARC published software that makes 
it possible for biologists to visualize and analyze molecule dockings. 
Candidate molecules are sifted through a series of screens so that 
couples that have an actual chance of pairing up due to their shape can 
be identified. The contacts and deformations that occur during the 
phenomenon are then simulated. The tool allows researchers to interact 
with the docking phenomenon during the simulation. 


A wealth of scientific outputs 


HEADEXP: validating the harmlessness 
of cell phone equipment 

In 2003 and 2004, several INRIA teams made up an ARC called 
Headexp to study the impact of electromagnetic radiation from mobile 
phones on user head tissues. The initiative resulted in the development 
of a computer simulation tool based on wave propagation numerical 
methods operating on realistic geometrical models of head tissues, 
more relevant than the simple preexisting ones. This simulation tool 
allows to accurately take into account the heterogeneity of human head 
tissues. This research involved skills in modeling and simulation of electromagnetic wave propagation (CAIMAN and ONDES project-teams), 
medical imaging (ÉPIDAURE project-team and the image processing 
and interpretation group of ENST in Paris), automatic mesh generation 
(GAMMA and GÉOMETRICA project-teams) and neurosciences 
(ODYSSÉE project-team). The France Telecom R&D teams specialized in 
biological effects of electromagnetic wave radiation and in antenna 
design were associated to the work, as well as a researcher from the 
National Institute of Industrial Environment and Risks. 

DYNAS: modeling for the protection 
of the environment 

Dynas was launched in 2004 by project-team ESTIME of INRIA, the 
CEMAGREF and its DEAN research unit, the CERMICS (applied mathematics) and CEREVE (environment) departments of the École nationale 
des ponts et chaussées, and the Fluid Mechanics Institute of Strasbourg 
(IMFS). 
The goal of this initiative is to apply modeling techniques to water 
flows in porous media, especially along slopes. The applications of such 
research are important in the fields of hydrology, hence in environment. 
The objective of the teams is to develop simulation and computational 
tools for various phenomena such as terrain saturation, flux propagation, 
and so on. 
A first workshop was held at INRIA Rocquencourt in December 2004. 
The outcome of the initiative is in two years. 

TangiMap: 3D navigation 
interface for a PDA 
Project-team IPARLA 
Modeling temperature 
diffusion in tissues 
ARC HEADEXP - Project-team CAIMAN 
3 experimentations 

Experimentation is a crucial stage, the first concrete 
manifestation of research work. It is needed to adapt 
and validate systems implemented in actual technical 
environments. Experimentation is the first step toward 
innovation. 

PERF-RV: innovating more simply 
with virtual reality 

Around twenty academic and industrial departments, including INRIA 
teams in Rennes and Rocquencourt have explored numerous aspects 
linked to the development of a complete virtual reality platform, in order 
to foster and simplify innovation. Such a platform makes it possible to 
model a virtual world, visualize it in 3D and interact with in real time. 
Project PERF-RV launched by INRIA in 2001 in the framework of the 
National Network for Research and Technological Innovation in 
Software Technology, resulted in significant scientific and technological 
advances. The research and development phase ended in October 2004 
with the presentation of an experimentation of this “future engineering 
and design department” at the CEA of Fontenay-aux-Roses. The results 
of PERF-RV can be seen in various virtual reality platforms installed in 
particular at PSA, CEA and INRIA. These results are of interest to many 
companies, including Dassault Systèmes, Virtools and so on. INRIA 
research scientists are pursuing the development in order to integrate 
new advances and construct a digital simulation platform dedicated to 
design. 

10•11



DIATELIC: expert systems simplify 
diabetic patients follow-up 

Peritoneal dialysis has less constraints than traditional dialysis. It can be 
used to treat chronic renal insufficiency patients at home, which 
concerns more than 2,500 patients in France and around 120,000 
worldwide. Patients are equipped with an intraperitoneal catheter and 
are able to perform the necessary dialyses themselves. Loria has been 
working for a few years in partnership with the Lorraine Association of 
Renal Insufficiency Patients (ALTIR) and Nancy teaching hospital, to 
improve the follow-up of such patients using expert systems. In 2004, 
this collaboration resulted in the general implementation of the Diatelic 
system for all concerned patients, that is to say one hundred persons in 
the area of Nancy, Vittel and Verdun. With Diatelic, patients and their 
relatives regularly enter various parameters that concern them on a 
computer. The system analyzes the data and automatically warns 
the doctor in case of problem. Monitoring is constant in spite of the 
distance. The system was experimented on for two years in order to 
validate its reliability before being brought up to scale. The team is now 
involved in project DEPIC that will directly gather the information from 
a sensor located on the catheter, in order to diagnose infection risks 
before the appearance of clinical signs and complications. The new 
system will be experimented on in 2005. 

CYCAB: the car of the future 
for protected neighborhoods 

From June 3 to June 13, 2004, automated vehicles drove through 
Antibes amidst pedestrians and two-wheelers, transporting people who 
wished to be transported. This world first experiment was intended to 
demonstrate the benefits of new types of vehicles-automatic, 
economical, non polluting and totally silent-in a protected urban area 
with which they communicate. 
The operational implementation of these future vehicles is based on 
complex research carried out by fifteen European partners in the framework of the 5th FP (Framework Program for Technological Research and 
Development), a research coordinated by INRIA. The vehicles talk to the 
urban environment via an array of sensors, image processing software 
and other communication technology developed by different INRIA 
teams and by numerous foreign academic and industrial and 
engineering and design departments. In particular, the IMARA team 
applied its work in the field of the “automated road” and the VISA 
development initiative put an experimentation platform at the disposal 
of research scientists in order to validate research on such future 
vehicles. Other experiments were conducted in parallel in Bayonne, 
Coimbra and Rotterdam. 

ParkShuttle at Antibes 
Driverless shuttle transport 
developed by the Frog company 

MICCAI 2004 in Saint-Malo 

A wealth of scientific outputs 


3 events 

Scientific events are one of the first main knowledge 
dissemination mode. INRIA organized 25 international 
conferences in 2004, which have gathered 4,360 
attendees including 3,200 from many countries. 

EUROGRAPHICS 

INRIA Rhône-Alpes organized and hosted the 25th Eurographics conference, the most important European conference on computer graphics and 
virtual reality. The conference was held from August 30 to September 3, 
2004, in Grenoble. More than 500 scientists, industry representatives and 
users presented their scientific and technological innovations applied to 
digital leisure, multimedia application and scientific visualization. Claude 
Puech was awarded the 1st "Eurographics Distinguished Career Award" 
for his fundamental contributions in computer graphics on the occasion of 
the conference. 

SIGMOD/PODS 

For the first time, the prestigious SIGMOD/PODS international 
conference on databases was held in France on June 13-18, 2004. 
The conference was organized by INRIA and the ACM (Association for 
Computing Machinery) with more than 500 attendees from research 
and industry, on topics concerning security, embedded or multimedia 
data management, and so on. On this occasion, the “SIGMOD Test of 
Time” prize that distinguishes the ten year old publication with the most 
impact since then, was awarded to Serge Abiteboul (INRIA), Sophie 
Cluet (INRIA), Michel Scholl (CNAM and INRIA) and Vassilis 
Christophides (ICS-Forth, Greece) for their article "From Structured 
Documents to Novel Query Facilities" at SIGMOD 94 

MICCAI 2004 

IRISA (INRIA, CNRS, University of Rennes I and INSA) organized MICCAI 
2004, the international conference of reference in the field of medical 
image processing, computer aided surgery and medical robotics. The 
conference was held in Saint-Malo and Rennes on September 26-30. 
It was an occasion to gather together the new specialists that combine 
medicine, mathematics, robotics and computer science and to take stock 
of the considerable advances achieved every year in these fields. 

A few publications 

Handbook of Numerical Analysis 
Volume XII: Computational Models for the Human Body 

Nicholas Ayache Ed. 

Elsevier North-Holland, 2004. 676 pages 
ISBN: 0-444-51566-6 

The modeling of the human body and its algorithmic representations 
are assuming increasing importance in medical applications, in 
particular to realistically model certain functions on the computer. 
Such models can be used to better predict certain pathologies and 
better guide therapeutic strategies. This book describes concrete 
examples of such models covering a wide spectrum of methods and 
applications. The mathematical modeling of associated physical 
phenomena is presented and examples of numerical simulations for 
several organs and systems are given. 

Nicholas Ayache is the scientific head of project-team ÉPIDAURE 
(INRIA Sophia Antipolis). 

Interactive Theorem Proving and Program Development: 
Coq'Art: the Calculus of Inductive Constructions 

Yves Bertot and Pierre Castéran 

Springer, 2004 

This book proposes a practical introduction to the development 
of certified proofs and programs using Coq. Coq is a proving aid tool, 
a system that manipulates formal mathematical proofs. Coq is based 
on a logical formalism called the Calculus of Inductive Constructions. 
The book includes a series of examples and exercises that make it 
a must have for researchers, students and engineers interested in 
formal proof, and the development of zero defects software. 

Yves Bertot is a research scientist of project-team LEMME
(INRIA Sophia Antipolis).
Pierre Castéran is a research scientist of the project-team SIGNES
(INRIA Futurs).


Computer arithmetics and computations 

IC2 Treatise, Computing and Information Systems series 

Jean-Claude Bajard and Jean-Michel Muller 

Hermès-Lavoisier, ISBN: 2-7462-0861-X, May 2004, 226 pages. 

This book presents the current state of the art in computer 
arithmetics. It then presents the algorithms used to perform 
such operations as additions and multiplications (the basis of 
numerical computing), as well as their hardware implementation. 
The book next considers the computation of elementary functions 
(sine, logarithm, etc.). Several hardware or software solutions are 
proposed to enlarge machine computation capabilities. The book 
also describes the main algorithms in multiprecision libraries 
that are sometimes needed because the precision supplied by 
processors is insufficient for certain computations. The book closes 
on the study of arithmetic operators on finite fields that are crucial 
for encoding and cryptography. 

Jean-Michel Muller is the scientific head of project-team ARENAIRE
(INRIA Rhône-Alpes). 
Jean-Claude Bajard is Professor at the Computer Science Department
of Montpellier, LIRMM.


12•13



GRID’5000


GRID’5000: PC clusters 
at Irisa-INRIA Rennes 
and INRIA Rhône-Alpes 
5,000 networked processors in INRIA's and 
its partners research units, for a one-of 
its-kind experimental computational tool 
worldwide. 

The French research community has decided to set up an experimental grid consisting of 5,000 processors connected via high 
speed networks. This equipment represents an up to now 
unique instrument to study grid computing. INRIA is strongly 
involved in the operation, called GRID'5000, which is funded by 
the Ministry of Research with INRIA, CNRS, Renater and various 
regional and departmental councils. Several universities are 
also associated with the project. 

Computing grids meet a double challenge: 

¦ an increasing need in resources (computation, storage and 
communication) for various applications in medicine, climatology, imaging, high energy physics, geophysics, engineering 
and so forth, and 
¦ the need to share data, programs and resources beyond 
geographical and administrative borders for members of 
virtual communities. 
Tomorrow, grids will offer a very wide spectrum of new services 
over the Internet. They however demand an adaptation of 
the whole of software tools to their distributed architecture: 
network protocols, operating systems, grid middleware, executable supports, programming environments and applications. 
Many research team as involved in these themes, especially at 
INRIA. With GRID'5000, they will be able to test their developments and demonstrate the stability, security, accessibility and 
performance of computing grids. 

Project-team GRAND LARGE of INRIA Futurs steers the whole 
project and develops high performance, fault tolerant middleware. The goal of DOLPHIN is to model and solve in parallel 
large scale combinatorial problems. RUNTIME develops execution supports intended to ease the use of high performance 
components. In Rennes, PARIS developed a software component 
model based on the CORBA standard by integrating parallel 
applications. The team is also working on large scale data storage. SAGE studies the “gridification” of scientific computing 
applications. At INRIA Rhône-Alpes, GRAAL develops middleware for grid application deployment. MESCAL works on scaling 
properties of middleware. MOAIS proposes programming 
models and load balancing techniques. RESO is interested in 
network performance and control and is looking for the 
changes to be made to the TCP/IP protocol architecture of the 
Internet to adapt it to very high speeds. At Rocquencourt, 
REGAL studies the problems linked to the dynamic character of 
grid environments and peer to peer systems. At Sophia 
Antipolis, OASIS works on a Java programming environment 
called Proactive that encourages computation portability and 
mobility. CAIMAN and SMASH propose algorithms for parallel, 
distributed resolution of partial differential equations. 
SCALAPPLIX (Futurs), ALGORILLE (Lorraine),SYMBIOSE (Rennes), 
COPRIN, ÉPIDAURE (Sophia Antipolis) also work in relation with 
project GRID'5000. 

GRID'5000 will be deployed on eight sites in France, including 
seven INRIA sites: Bordeaux, Lille and Orsay (INRIA Futurs), 
INRIA Rennes, Grenoble and Lyon (INRIA Rhône-Alpes), and 
INRIA Sophia Antipolis. The eighth site will be hosted in 
Toulouse by a team of the ENSEEIHT. Each site will feature high 
performance parallel computers composed of PC clusters. The 
sites will be interconnected via the Renater network. Close to 
one thousand processors were already deployed at the end of 
2004. 


A wealth of scientific outputs 


STUDENTS 

AND RESEARCH SCIENTISTS: 

shared progress 

Training through research is at the heart of INRIA. It is on the one hand, 
one of the Institute's missions, which it carries out in partnership with 
the universities and engineering schools. On the other hand, the work 
of doctoral candidates and postdocs is an often significant contribution 
to the research carried out within INRIA project-teams. To open up 
the world of research and share its passion for ICST, INRIA welcomes 
more than 1,500 students of all levels from the B.A. to postdocs, for 
durations of a few weeks up to three years. 
The Institute signed agreements with many graduate programs to welcome doctoral candidates who come prepare their Ph.D. for an average 
period of three years. INRIA integrates these students within its projectteams, which presents a double advantage. Doctoral candidates work 
in internationally recognized teams and benefit from a high level 
scientific support. At the same time, their doctoral work contributes to 
advances in research. INRIA had 950 doctoral candidates in 2004, a 
15% increase over 2003, which confirms the 10% growth between 
2002 and 2003 and demonstrates the Institute's attractiveness. Close 
to one third of them came from abroad, in particular from North Africa 
and Asia, but also from the Americas and Europe. 
The doctoral candidates who prepared their Ph.D. at the Institute are 
encouraged to acquire a postdoctoral experience in other research 
projects in France or abroad. 
INRIA also welcomes postdocs, with a selection based on criteria 
of scientific experience and mobility. Thus, postdoc stays are partly 
financed by the government, European projects and the Institute's own 
resources. In 2004, 150 postdocs, including a significant part of foreign 
researchers, were working within INRIA's project-teams. 

(1) 
(5) (6) (7) 
(2) (3) (4) 
Prizes, appointments 

Philippe Flajolet (1), senior research scientist 
of project-team ALGO, was awarded the CNRS 
silver medal. This medal singles out nationally and 
internationally recognized research scientists for 
the originality, quality and importance of their 
work. 

The doctoral thesis prize of the SPECIF (Society 
of Computer Science Academics and Researchers 
in France) was awarded to Sid-Ahmed 
Berrani (2), who prepared his thesis in projectteam TEXMEX in the framework of an agreement 
between IRISA and Thomson (Rennes Thomson 
Research Center). The thesis is entitled 
“Approximative search for nearest neighbors with 
probabilistic precision control: application to 
image search by contents” (Doctorate of the 
University of Rennes I, February 2004) 

David Cohen-Steiner received a thesis prize 
from the French École polytechnique. His thesis, 
prepared under the direction of Jean-Daniel 
Boissonnat, project-team GEOMETRICA is entitled: 
“A few surface discretization problems”. 

Véronique Cortier (3), a CNRS research 
scientist working in project-team CASSIS (Loria) 
received “Le Monde de la Recherche” prize for her 
doctoral thesis “Automatic verification of cryptographic protocols”. This work carried out within 
project-team SECSI (INRIA Futurs) had received 
the 2003 SPECIF thesis prize. 

Eric Filiol (4), a research scientist of the projectteam CODES specializing in symmetrical cryptology 
received the “higher education” Roberval 2004 
prize for his monograph on Computer viruses 
published by Springer. 

Clément Forest (5), a former doctoral candidate of EPIDAURE, is the laureate of “Le Monde de 
la Recherche” prize (Ph.D. jointly under N. Ayache 
and H. Delinguette). The thesis was defended at 
the École polytechnique last year. It concerned the 
simulation of laparoscopic surgery, more precisely 
original models of interaction between a surgical 
instrument and a deformable organ model. 
Clément Forest also received the best demonstration prize during the “Medical Simulation 2004” 
international symposium held in Boston on June 
17-18, 2004. 

Liliana Ibanescu (6), of project-team PROTHÉO, 
received one of the five thesis prizes of INPL for 
her thesis “Rule programming and strategies for 
the automatic generation of polycyclic hydrocarbons 
combustion mechanisms” defended in 2003. 

Mathieu Turuani (7) is one of the four 
prizewinners of the thesis prize of the French 
Association of Fundamental Computer Science for 
his thesis entitled “Cryptographic protocol security, decidability and complexity”, prepared under 
Michael Rusinowitch of project-team CASSIS. 

14•15



TRANSMITTING, SHARING 

knowledge and research advances 

INRIA is the owner of a unique capital of experience and knowledge 
in ICST through its teams. The Institute has set up an organization that 
fosters the transmission and sharing of this capital for very wide audiences. The multiple objectives that guide communication at INRIA are to 
inform partners on research advances, explain ICST and its challenges 
to the general public, participate in student training and raise awareness among youth and develop a liking for science. INRIA has built 
bridges between its research scientists and its audiences, in order to 
collect stories and facts, identify the researchers who can answer such 
and such request, and to give a great many presentations adapted to 
different levels of pedagogy. In fact, many audiences are interested in 
ICST. 
INRIA publishes INédit, a journal aimed at its research partners, 
and Bleu INRIA, a newsletter for elected representatives and public 
decision makers. 
In 2004, INRIA formed a collection of multimedia scientific presentations for students and researchers wishing to improve their knowledge 
of ICST. In parallel, the Institute is actively involved in the Science Fair 
and reaches out to a very young audience on this occasion. In October 
2004, INRIA launched a scientific popularization website, called 
Interstices. The site proposes a “discovery of the universe of ICST” 
and is aimed at a wide audience interested in science. The site features 
scientists portraits, thematic files, a history of discoveries, a presentation 
of ongoing research, and very pedagogical explanations of complex 
phenomena. 

Showing research 

INRIA wants to show the general public how its research may result 
in surprising applications. A domestic network called Mirror Space by 
project-team IN SITU of INRIA Futurs was presented at the Beaubourg 
museum for the Interactive Design Exhibit and at the Cité des Sciences 
(see article in the second part of this document). A demonstration of the 
“city of the future” drew much attention at the Senate by showing how 
vehicles could establish a dialog with urban fixtures. 

Giving a taste for ICST 

Youth is a priviledged audience for INRIA. The Institute develops a very 
diversified communication strategy to get them interested, give them a 
taste for science and incite them to contribute to research. This 
approach supported and encouraged by INRIA takes the form of numerous initiatives in the research units. In 2004, INRIA participated in the 
5th show on mathematical games and culture that was held in Paris on 
June 3-6. Two INRIA units, Futurs and Rocquencourt, were present on 
the mathematical jobs stand. Andreas Enge of project-team TANC gave 
a talk on the use of mathematics in research work. 


INRIA Rhône-Alpes participated in the “Taste for Science” event 
organized on November 15-17 by the CCSTI-Grenoble. This seminar on 
education-research-business pedagogical practice is intended to make 
better known the regional initiatives aiming at restoring the taste for 
science among youth. INRIA Rhône-Alpes was the sponsor of this 
first event. The research unit conducted one session of the seminar and 
participated in the filming of a presentation of scientific careers. 
In October and November, INRIA organized a series of talks at the Cité 
des Sciences, under the direction of Gilles Dowek, Professor at the École 
polytechnique and scientific head of project-team LOGICAL. 
Finally, INRIA Rocquencourt signed a partnership agreement with 
the Versailles local education authority to develop joint initiatives 
concerning mathematics in particular. 
INRIA is preparing a program to intensify such initiatives in 2005, 
in collaboration with various partners, research scientists, universities, 
CNRS, and so on. 


INRIA became a member of the Sudoc, the network 
of French university libraries, to gather the catalogs 
of its information centers into a common base. 
This base will include more that 5.4 million 
notices available in 948 libraries. It will make it 
possible to put richer information at the disposal 
of researchers while augmenting the visibility of 
its document stock. 
INRIA is committed to the “open archive initiative” 
since it signed the Berlin declaration* on “free 
access to knowledge in exact sciences, life sciences, 
human and social sciences” on July 25, 2004. 
The Institute is simultaneously preparing to set 
up its own open archives in partnership with 
the CCSD, the Center for Direct Scientific 
Communication of CNRS in Lyon. 
The publication of scientific works is at the heart of 
this movement. Traditional publication is through 
scientific journals that evaluate and publish 
articles, often with important delays. Since a few 
years ago, research scientists have gotten used 
to posting their publication projects directly on a 
web server in order to put them at the disposal 
of the scientific community rapidly and free of 
charge. Thus was born the “open archives 
initiative”. Archive servers were set up such as 
ArXiv in the field of physics in the United States. 
Search engines were created to facilitate access to 
the archives. 
It is essential for INRIA, whose objective is to 
circulate its research work as widely as possible, 
to set up a server that guarantees the permanence 
of this approach and visibility of publications. By 
signing a framework agreement with CNRS, INRIA 
will constitute a pool of its scientific production, 
based on a self-archiving approach on the part 
of research scientists. The latter will be able to 
publish all their work on the server, including 
research reports and article projects. INRIA is the 
second French research organization with CNRS to 
establish “open archives”. 
[*] http://www.zim.mpg.de/openaccess-berlin/berlin 
declaration.html 
INRIA prepares 
its “Open Archives” 
with CNRS 
Speech2Graphite: 
lip-reading learning aid tool 
for young deaf persons 
Project-teams ISA and PAROLE 
(in collaboration with the DATHA association) 
A wealth of scientific outputs 
16•17



A fruitful dialogbetween 
research and innovation 
750 ongoing research contracts, including 230 research contracts signed in 2004, 
175 active patents, 120 freely available or marketed software packages, 
80 technology companies, including 7 created in 2004 
Real time 
augmented reality 
Project-team LAGADIC 

A fruitful dialog 


INRIA develops its research in close proximity 
with industry and services that make extensive 
use of ICST in such way that its work contributes 
as much as possible to the new systems and 
products that are put at the disposal of the public. 
In each of its research units, INRIA has a team 
specializing in industrial transfer to help 
research scientists develop such partnerships. 
This activity translates into a permanent dialog 
with business under various forms: clubs, 
bilateral contracts, joint research departments, 
consortiums, standardization bodies, and so on. 

Partnerships 

Partnerships with business are an essential source of 
inspiration for INRIA researchers, a means of identifying 
the needs and demands of users. 
Company expectations often make it possible to orient 
research and its applications toward the most important 
challenges. They also make it possible to analyze and 
solve the problems at their actual scale. This is why 
INRIA conducts much research in partnership with 
industrial departments or innovative small and medium 
sized companies. The companies for which ICST plays a 
central role also invest a significant part of their 
turnover in R&D, which encourages fruitful exchanges 
with INRIA teams. 
Numerous programs are ongoing. The following two 
examples show the diversity of such work. 

OZONE: ICST for the general public 

Project OZONE (new technologies and services for emerging nomadic 
societies) mobilized academic and industrial resources for a common 
objective, which was to put ICST advances at the disposal of the 
general public within everyday life appliances. This European initiative 
lasted for three years and involved eleven INRIA teams, research centers 
of Philips and Thomson, as well as Epictoïd, the Belgian microelectronics 
interuniversity center, and the Eindhoven technical university in the 
Netherlands. Researchers explored numerous topics with emphasis on 
the user side: multimodal human-machine interfaces, access to services 
and content available on the web from various devices (TV sets, 
PDAs,...), access to multimedia content, and so on. Each time the 
envisioned solution took the context into account-inside/outside, 


Distributed fluid simulation on PC 
cluster with FlowVR 

Project-team APACHE 


18•19



silence/noise, mobile/fixed networks. OZONE was completed in August 
2004 and its results were implemented into three demonstrators that 
were used to make experiments on mobile user access on the one hand, 
and public or private multimedia content access and sharing on the 
other hand. To pursue this research, the INRIA teams got involved in a 
new European project called AMIGO in 2005. The new project also 
associates academic and industrial partners, including Philips who is the 
project coordinator 

SATIN: toward interactive TV 

The WAM team (Web Adaptation and Multimedia) and the new 
HTTV company founded in 1998 and specializing in interactive TV, 
jointly launched a research and development program called SATIN, 
supported by the RIAM (French National research and technological 
innovation network devoted to multimedia and audiovisual). This 
program covers many aspects of interactive television-program 
production and broadcasting, for all used networks (cable, satellite, 
ADSL, DTTV, etc.), and decoding (local management of interaction). 
In collaboration with HTTV, WAM contributed to defining the global 
architecture of the system and to determining a representation format 
for interactive programs. The team also developed a program editing 
software component based on the SMIL format, a W3C standard, 
that makes it possible to coordinate and describe the various interaction 
elements (overlays, synchronizations, information complements, etc.) 
irrespective of the streaming format. This partnership resulted in a 
software transfer: the tool will be integrated by HTTV into their Prime 
TV system. There were also personnel exchanges. Project WAM's expert 
engineer joined the HTTV team, who is also welcoming a postdoc. 

The SATIN interactive TV 
program editor, 
with multimedia data 
synchronization 
Project-team WAM 
Software transfer: 

the economic impact 

INRIA research projects result in the production of 
experimental prototype software. In a good many cases, 
this first step is continued by the development of software that will either be marketed or put at the disposal 
of all potential users as open source. INRIA chooses the 
type of license that will ensure the widest diffusion of its 
software case by case. 
The Institute has set up a specific organization to 
actively support this evolution from prototype to finished 
software. Development engineers improve, stabilize and 
document the applications so that they can be distributed. Engineers and researchers are helped in this work 
by specialized software development teams in each 
research unit. In 2004, the efficiency of this approach 
was demonstrated by the adoption of many software 
packages by industry. 

C-JDBC 

C-JDBC is a middleware developed by the SARDES team for database 
clustering that received many awards in 2004-finalist in the “best data-
base category” at the LinuxWorld Product Excellence Awards in August, 
and winner of the ApacheCon Derby Code Contest in November. 
Version 1.0.4 of C-JDBC was released in October. C-JDBC makes it possible for any application to transparently access a database cluster with 
high availability and excellent performance. C-JDBC is distributed by 
ObjectWeb, a consortium co-founded by INRIA to develop the diffusion 
of robust, free software middleware in order to encourage standards 
and sharing. ObjectWeb provides an industrial grade support service for 
entirely secure adoption of the product. In 2004, C-JDBC was downloaded 18,000 times. The site recorded close to 1.5 million hits. 

http://c-jdbc.objectweb.org/ 

SYNDEX 

SynDEx is a software tool to aid in optimized implementation of realtime, embedded, distributed applications. It is based on a methodology 
defined by INRIA researchers called AAA (algorithm-architecture adequacy) that makes it possible to manually and automatically explore 
possible implementations of an application software onto several 
computers in order to identify the best one. The tool is aimed at sectors 
in which embedded systems are critical, such as aerospace for flight 
controls, the automobile industry for all of the electronics, telecommunications, mobile robotics, industrial control, and so on. SynDEx is 
currently developed within the project-team AOSTE of INRIA. It was 
evaluated then adopted by several major players in the field. 
For example, MDBA uses SynDEx to add a new functionality to its Eryx 
antitank missile. 
In 2004, version 6.7.4 of SynDEx was re-architectured to meet user 
needs more efficiently and make for better maintenance. This version is 
cross-platform (Unix/Linux, Window, Mac OS) and freely downloadable 
on the web, with complete documentation, at www.syndex.org 


A fruitful dialog 


Intellectual property:
launching CeCILLthe first free software 
license compatible withFrench law 
In 2004, INRIA participated in the drawing 
up of new free software, viral license, 
CeCILL, based on French law, in collabora-
tion with CNRS and the CEA. 
The interest of free software, which is not 
necessarily free of charge, is to disclose 
the source code that can be modified and 
redistributed by third parties. This allows a 
very large community of developers, users 
and industry to regularly contribute to 
improving and enriching the software. 
When most free software is distributed 
under Anglo-Saxon license, the new CeCILL 
license makes it possible to define and 
delineate use and diffusion principles in 
accordance with French law. This is an 
important step that demonstrates INRIA's 
commitment to take the best possible 
care of the intellectual property of the 
results of its research projects, in all cases 
(software licenses, patents, know-how, 
results of cooperative work with external 
partners, etc.). This approach falls within 
the framework of the debate on pooled 
development of free software components 
provided for by the French ADELE 
(Electronic Administration 2004-2007) 
government program. 
20•21 
Computing curvature 
directions on a mesh 
Project-team GÉOMETRICA 

Automatic canopy extraction 
from a satellite image 
Project-team ARIANA 
SPEECH2GRAPHITE 
Speech2Graphite was presented in October 2004 on the occasion 
of the Science Fair. It looks like a “talking head”. The purpose of 
Speech2Graphite is to allow hearing impaired persons to follow a 
spoken discourse independently of the position of the speaker. 
It is developed by the project-teams ISA and PAROLE of INRIA 
Lorraine/LORIA, in partnership with the DATHA association 
(Development of technological aids for hearing impaired persons). 
A three-dimensional image of a face is generated that reproduces 
lip movements based on a recorded speech signal. In order to facilitate 
lip reading, a hand is also represented in three-dimensions to add 
information on the consonants and vowels, which makes it possible to 
eliminate ambiguities between sounds corresponding to the same 
shapes of the lips, such as p and b for example. The setup may be 
complemented with subtitles. The system combines a phoneme 
recognition tool called Espere and a complex driving system based on a 
model that makes it possible to associate a shape of the lips and face, 
and its computer graphics translation, with each sound. By simplifying 
access to spoken discourse, combined with subtitle precision, 
Speech2Graphite opens up many application prospects, for example 
French language learning for deaf children. 
CORESE 
Corese (Conceptual Resource Search Engine) is a search engine for the 
semantic web based on the RDF language of the W3C. It is developed 
by the ACACIA team. Corese is made freely available for researchers on 
the team's website and was proposed for evaluation to different indus-
trial partners (Telecom Valley, Renault, ATOS, T-Systems NOVA Deutsche 
Telekom, etc.). Corese was used as a basis for numerous knowledge 
management applications. In 2004, EADS adopted it as a basis for 
a corporate memory application. The technology university of Troyes is 
working on an application on project memory. The project-team 
GALAAD of INRIA is also using it for a European project. 
A two year software development operation based on the prototype 
was completed in June 2004. This operation improved the quality 
of Corese and stabilized its development environment. Since then, a 
startup called eCore has been incubating with the goal of marketing 
a family of competence management applications based on Corese. 
This project was prizewinner of the 2004 business creation competition 
(a national competition for aid in innovative technology company 
creation by the French Ministry in charge of research). 
http://www-sop.inria.fr/acacia/soft/corese 
Standardization: 
decisive contributions 
INRIA is committed to the search and definition of 
standards. Standards are essential in the field of ICST in 
order to encourage the adoption of collectively developed 
specifications by the largest number of users. 
Standards can be enacted by international standardiza-
tion bodies, such as ISO, ETSI, and so on, or developed 
within consortiums that regroup experts stemming 
from public and private research. The consortiums 
sometimes are without incorporation. 
INRIA participates in the work of most standardization bodies, including 
the ISO. The Institute is also an active member of a large number of con-
sortiums, that do not enact standards but issue recommendations. 
Recommendations are sets of specifications that describe how to 
implement a technology in principle, with strong emphasis on interop-
erability. Recommendations are all the more likely to be adopted as the 
consortium gathers a wide range of actors. Such is the case of the IETF 
for the IP world, the W3C for the web, the OMG (Object Management 
Group) for object technology, and the TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) for 
the development of digital textual resources. 
In 2004, various tools developed by INRIA research scientists emerged 
as new standards, such as OLSR developed by the HIPERCOM team 
for ad hoc mobile networks, the first European tool standardized by the 
IETF in this area, and the formal security specification model developed 
by EVEREST and adopted by the GlobalPlatform Card Specification 
v2.1.1 consortium. GlobalPlatform is the reference organization for 
the all main actors in the field of smart cards. 
Such joint work is accompanied by a permanent dialog organized by 
INRIA in each of its research units. Regular meetings are held to foster 
exchanges between industry representatives and researchers on a 
topical theme. A national INRIA-Industry one day meeting was also held 
on January 27, 2004 at Rocquencourt on software engineering. 
In 2004, INRIA Sophia Antipolis initiated the “software cafés”, short 
meetings around a coffee cup during which teams presented develop-
ment tools (SmartTools), the programming library of the grid (ProActive) 
and the Corese knowledge management tool. This successful initiative 
was taken up by INRIA Lorraine. 

A fruitful dialog 


Project-team REO 
Body and gesture 
observation 
temporal system 
Project-team PRIMA 
Realtime penumbra 
computation 
Project-teams ARTIS-GRAVIR 
Visualization of the wall 
pressure in a sacculated 
brain aneurysm 

Spinning off 

Little by little, company creation appeared as a natural 
solution to transfer research results. As soon as such 
results can have economic or social applications, and 
that no partner company is willing to develop them, it is 
important to help transfer by fostering the creation of a 
new company. This is a long, difficult path, all the more 
so since the ICST market is now mature. Significant 
financial support is necessary as well as enough time 
to carve a market niche. Many INRIA young research 
scientists and engineers are more than willing and 
brimming with ideas. This is why in 1998 INRIA created 
a specialized, efficient tool. INRIA-Transfert and the 
startup funds contributed to a sustained rate of company 
creation since 1997. 

In 2004, in spite of a difficult situation in terms on 
investment and risk taking, seven new companies were 
launched. 


Pre- and postprocessing solutions 
for the optimization of the computerized 
design chain 

The purpose of Distene is to develop and offer the best skills and 
technology in the field of scientific preprocessing and postprocessing, 
two key areas in the optimization of the computerized design chain. 
Distene is a 2004 spin-off of Simulog, the first INRIA startup, from 
which it gets its technological and human capital. Thus, over fifteen 
years of R&D in collaboration with INRIA, and ten years of commercial 
partnerships with the largest CAD/computing solution publishers and 
industrial users of such technology, make Distene an international 
reference right from the start. 


Algorithms for the evaluation of financial risks 

Finoptech was founded in February 2004 by an INRIA research scientist. 
The company targets investment banks, hedge funds and fund 
management companies. It proposes an innovative mathematical and 
computer approach of pricing and risk assessment for complex 
structured products. Market departments and fund managers are 
increasingly in demand for mathematical tools in order to control an 
activity made more complicated by the development of sophisticated 
financial products. Finoptech develops algorithmic and analytic methods that allow them to estimate prices and risks in constrained time 
during their operations, in particular through the development of new 
Monte-Carlo methods and efficient calibration techniques. The team 
is working in partnership with INRIA. Finoptech is hosted by the 
startup incubator at Rocquencourt and is currently in its commercial 
development phase. 

22•23



Genomics exploration 

Genostar is a bioinformatics software publisher founded in 2004. 
Its offer is structured around an environment for genomic and postgenomic data modeling, analysis and exploration, that includes the 
GenoStar platform stemming from the work of the consortium by 
the same name. This consortium includes the HELIX team of INRIA, the 
Pasteur Institute and two biotech companies, GENOME Express and 
Hybrigenics. In May 2002, the consortium work resulted in a first 
version of an integrated set of software modules that quickly caught the 
interest of research departments. Three modules make up the Genostar 
platform: GenoAnnot is used by biologists to annotate genomic 
sequences, that is to say to identify the areas of biological interest 
foremost of which are those containing the genes; GenoLink makes it 
possible to compare and cross examine heterogeneous information in 
order to characterize the proteins that are produced by these genes; 
finally GenoBool makes it possible to efficiently conduct exploratory 
analyses of complex datasets by making use of data mining techniques. 
Genostar also offers two software packages stemming from HELIX 
research work: GEB (GenoExpertBacteria) to explore the links between 
the genes and the metabolic networks via the enzymes coded for by the 
genes, and GNA (Genetic Network Analyzer) that leverages particularly 
powerful modeling and simulation techniques for the study of the 
dynamics of genetic interaction networks. 

V-Eye, an Internet virtual 
world with a large number 
of participants 
Project-team PLANETE 
Shared adventures 
and success 
Ilog was founded in 1987 with an 51% 
participation of INRIA to its capital. The 
company quickly found its market. It suc-
cessfully installed itself in the United States 
and is now present in seven countries. Ilog 
publishes software components for opti-
mization, visualization and business rules. 
The company achieved a turnover of 
$102.8 million in 2004 and is listed in the 
NASDAQ and Euronext. INRIA sold its 
shares in 1998 to build up the capital of 
INRIA-Transfert. 
Kelkoo was created in 1999 based on 
research work on information mediation 
carried out by INRIA and Bull. The company 
rapidly became the number one shopping 
engine with a turnover of more than 42.5 
million euros and exceptional results. 
On March 26, 2004, Yahoo! Inc, the Internet 
world leader, and Kelkoo SA, the European 
leader of Internet price comparison and 
shopping engines, announced the signing of 
a final agreement sealing the buyout of 
Kelkoo by Yahoo!. 
Numerous INRIA startups such as Trusted 
Logic, Xylème, Realviz and UDCast remain 
partners of the Institute in marketing 
licenses for its technologies on the one 
hand, and in pursuing research and devel-
opment programs on the other hand. 
The computing power of PC networks 

ICATIS was first a prize-winning project in the 2003 “emergence” 
category competition. The company was created in January 2004 by 
a CNRS research engineer and an INRIA research scientist. It is located 
in Grenoble. ICATIS offers an innovative approach of PC cluster grid 
computing in two areas of application. The ComputeMode technology 
developed by the ID research department in partnership with project 
APACHE, proposes to perform computations in a more flexible way by 
using company PC networks. This way, companies do not have to invest 
in dedicated computers. For example, the Total group is interested in 
such techniques to analyze and model drilling zones. The second application, which is still in development in partnership with project-team 
MOVI of INRIA, makes it possible to associate PC clusters with standard 
video projectors to project high quality computer graphics at an affordable price. 
ICATIS was awarded an Anvar prize in 2004 and achieved a turnover 
of 180,000 euros for its first year of operation. The company is still in 
its market discovery phase and is also developing a service offer based 
on Linux, computing and its ComputeMode package that is now 
available in “open source”. 


A fruitful dialog 


Avitrack: 
automatic video image 
interpretation, recognizing 
an unloading operation 

Project-team ORION 


Bayesian techniques 

The purpose of Probayes is to bring a new computer programming 
technique called probabilistic programming to industry. Probayes is 
scientifically supported by CNRS, the Joseph Fourier University, the INPG 
and INRIA. It was a 2001 prizewinner among innovative emerging 
projects by the French Ministry of Research and New Technology, the FSE 
and Anvar, and again in 2003 as “creation-development” project in the 
national competition for innovative technology company creation. 

TECNOMADE 

Tecnomade proposes a decision and concertation tool in architecture and 
city planning based on optimized, real time 3D modeling. The tool makes 
it possible to visualize a building and its surroundings from all angles, 
to move around it like a pedestrian or a car and to visit the interior. 
Three-dimensional interactive navigation is made easy for a nonspecialist 
audience due to a carefully crafted ergonomic interface. The tool also 
makes it possible to reduce costs of large scale, realistic mockup 
production and drastically cuts down on repetitive manual operations. 


Next generation infrastructure solution 

W2G TECHNOLOGIES was founded in March 2004. The goal of the 
company is to develop and market Web2Grid, a software technology 
to virtualize computing applications and transfer their execution on a 
service architecture implemented on a grid infrastructure. Such services 
make it possible to execute, distribute and globally operate the applications based on a set of pooled resources that can be reallocated on 
demand. The goal is to supply a next generation solution capable of 
significantly improving the cost/performance ratio of infrastructures, 
including hardware, software, network and human aspects. 
Infrastructures represent 70% of computing costs in companies. 
Web2Grid is intended for all organizations that must manage 
computer infrastructures. 

20 years of company creation at l’INRIA 

In 2004, INRIA made a positive assessment of twenty years of innovative company creation. Of the 77 created companies, close to fifty 
are still in operation today, either autonomously or within the large 
groups they have joined. This strategy allowed the Institute to be in 
direct contact with the economic environment and to better understand the changes it was going through. This strategy contributes to 
instilling an entrepreneurial spirit in the research teams and opens up 
diverse career prospects for their members: from the Academy of 
Sciences to the high tech stock market. 

1984 --1991 

Computer science forced its way into numerous industrial sectors. 
With its EPST status (Scientific and technological public establishment), INRIA was able to take stakes in industrial and commercial 
companies as early as 1984. During this period, twenty-two companies were created, including five of which INRIA was a shareholder. 
At that time, the ICST sector was emerging and the entry barrier was 
not very high. INRIA was able to become, and above all, remain the 
prime Ilog shareholder with an investment of less than 150,000 euros, 
which would be impossible today. 

1992 --1996 

The start of the decade crisis hit the IT world, henceforth closely 
linked to the economic activity. The entrance ticket for company 
creation rose. INRIA realized that it no longer had the means to fund 
innovative startups alone. The rhythm of creation of companies stemming from INRIA fell-five in five years-none of which had INRIA 
among its shareholders. 

1997 --2003 

In 1998, INRIA set up a financial tool to invest and accompany the 
development of high tech companies. This creation was followed by 
that of risk funds in partnership with AXA and the Caisse des dépôts 
et consignations, that make it possible to gather capital to be invested in the new startups. These measures combined with the incubators 
and competitions boosted company creation. This was the time of the 
Internet bubble and its subsequent bursting. More than 50% of all 
companies created by INRIA, which is to say 35 startups, were 
launched during these seven years. 

2004 and after 

If, in 2004, the economic situation has improved, company creation 
now takes place within a very competitive environment. Startups 
must not only demonstrate that they have an actual competitive 
edge, just like any new company, but also that their offer corresponds 
to an immediate demand with clients who are ready to pay. 
INRIA's experience shows that it is possible to create innovative companies stemming from public research, but that an efficient innovation policy requires time, specific funding separate from the research 
budget, and an accompaniment operation that is recognized by venture capital professionals. 
All the measures taken-risk fund creation, new innovative company 
status, company creation competitions, call for proposals on startup 
funds and incubators-have demonstrated that they are useful and 
efficient. It also appeared that they do not meet all situations, and 
that other measures will have to found to significantly increase the 
creation of innovative and long lasting companies stemming from 
research. 

24•25



6 research 
units, 
competence centers in the field of ICST 
Modeling the growth 
of a cervical tumor 
Project-team ÉPIDAURE 
6 research units, 19 sites in France, 7 joint laboratories, 
39 partner establishments, including 24 universities and 13 engineering schools in France, 
163 research teams, including 124 project-teams. 

6 research units 


INRIA is committed to a decentralized development model into research units implanted in 
the regions that orient their work according to 
the directions defined in the Institute's Strategic 
Plan. 
The purpose of the research units is to mobilize 
resources, competence and energies in the field 
of ITSC in order to actively contribute to the 
constitution of regional excellence centers, an 
idea encouraged by the Ministry of Research, 
and to play a driving role in innovation. Thus, 
INRIA fosters a networked research dynamics 
in partnership with business as well as other 
institutions. Six units have already been created 
in Île-de-France, Brittany, Lorraine, Rhône-Alpes 
and Provence. This dynamics is ongoing: the 
last unit created by the Institute, INRIA Futurs, 
is a prefiguration of three future research units 
in the South of Île-de-France, in Aquitaine and 
in Nord-Pas-de-Calais. 


3D seismic data visualization 
using a computing grid 
Project-team ISA 
Visualization of an 
algebraic surface 
Project-team GALAAD 
X2 
X Y2 --X2 
X Z2+Y2 
X Z2 --X X Y X Z = 0 

26•27



INRIA ROCQUENCOURT: 
security, performance, networks 
and health 

When INRIA was founded in 1967, it was called IRIA and was installed at 
Rocquencourt. The research unit long remained the Institute's only site. 
Today, it hosts around forty teams that play a decisive role in computer 
science and applied mathematics. 

Language expressiveness and safety and algorithm performance is one of the leading themes of the unit, with approximately 
forty software packages distributed. INRIA Rocquencourt is one of the 
partners of the Scilab consortium. The consortium gathers together 
many members* to develop a scientific computing package. In 2004, 
the new 3.0 version of Scilab intends to become an open source 
alternative to the world leader Matlab, which is proprietary software. 
Another success is the tetrahedral mesh generator developed by 
project-team GAMMA and purchased by worldwide publishers of CAD 
and scientific computing software. 

Networks and systems are expanding research themes in ICST, with 
much impact in terms of innovation, transfer and results. In 2004, the 
IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) standardized the OLSR routing 
protocol developed by project-team HIPERCOM. The SMIS project-team 
received the Silver Award of the 2004 e-gate open competition 
organized by Sun, Axalto and ST Microelectronics, for an embedded 
database system with security techniques intended for next generation 
smart cards. Research in this field also lead to a significant wave of 
startup creation in the past years, with Medience, Xyleme and N2Nsoft 
in particular. 

For a few years, projects in scientific computing, modeling and simulation as well as automatic control projects have been applying their skills 
to the life sciences, one of the unit's priority themes. The modeling 
and simulation of human body organs and major functions will be 
valued tools in medicine for prevention, diagnosis and therapy. In 2004, 
a new team called REO was created that develops blood flow modeling 
to improve prevention and treatment of cardiovascular diseases. 

The Rocquencourt unit is located in the Paris region, in the midst of a 
rich academic and industrial network, with which a resolute partnership 
strategy was engaged. One third of the research teams are joint with 
other laboratories. The unit is also increasingly working with industry, 
in particular through its participation in the development of a regional 
excellence center in the field of complex software and 
systems. Indeed, there are many players in this field in the region 
and the unit research in automatic control and embedded systems are 
strong contributors to innovation in this area. 

INRIA Rocquencourt signed an agreement with the University of 
Versailles-Saint-Quentin, INRA, the Versailles education authority, the 
UIFM, the regional and the departmental councils in order to organize 
the deployment of a very high speed fiber optics network in the region. 

The unit is also involved in several knowledge sharing and diffusion 
initiatives in the field of ICST. In 2004, it signed a partnership agreement 
with the Versailles education authority to promote mathematics among 
youth. The unit also launched “Thématiques INRIA” with INRIA Futurs 
and received a wide audience on its site for series of in-depth conferences on a given field, for example, musical sound. 

* Appedge, Axs Ingénierie, CEA, CNES, Cril Technology, Dassault Aviation, 
EDF, ENPC, Esterel Technologies, PSA Peugeot Citroën, Renault, Thales and TNI. 
Projects and partners 
Key figures 
480 persons, including 
366 scientists 
041 research teams, including 
025 INRIA project-teams and 
041 development project 
One third of the research teams are joint 
with the Universities of Paris V, Paris VI 
and Marne-la-Vallée, and the ENS, ENPC, 
ENSTA, CNAM and CNRS. 
Sophie Cluet, 
Research Unit Director 

6 research units 


INRIA RENNES: 

contributing to excellence for 25 years 

INRIA moved in Rennes as early as 1980 by creating a joint research 
unit with CNRS, the University of Rennes 1 and INSA Rennes. The unit 
was called IRISA, Institute of Computer Science and Random Systems 
Research. Since then, the unit extended its presence on other sites such 
as Nantes and Lannion. With IRISA, INRIA Rennes constitutes a regional center of excellence in the field of ICST and increasingly develops its 
international relations. In 2004, six teams of the unit were working with 
foreign departments in the framework of the INRIA Associate Team 
program. Twenty projects involving IRISA were selected in the 6th 
European FP. Two INRIA Rennes teams are European project coordinators: PARIS for the excellence network Core Grid on computing grids, 
and VISTA for project Fluid to develop emerging technology in the field 
of “fluid imaging”. INRIA Rennes works in close partnership with many 
businesses, large industrial groups and small and medium sized 
companies that are gathered together within the Irisatech club. The unit 
contributes to the creation of excellence centers in the region. 

INRIA Rennes is very active in bioinformatics within Ouest Génopole 
the center that has been regrouping genomic research developed in 
Brittany and Pays de Loire since 2002. INRIA is assuming the Ouest 
Génopole presidency for the academic year 2004-2005. Today, Ouest 
Génopole gathers together 2,000 research scientists from INSERM, 
IFREMER, INRA, CNRS, AFSSA and the Grand-Ouest universities. 
INRIA Rennes explores other areas at the interface between 
ITSC and the health sector, especially medical imaging in pre- and 
peroperative modes in medical robotics. 

Two research directions that are becoming more and more important 
in the region are images and their distribution on networks. 
INRIA Rennes is highly involved in this work in partnership with industry: virtual reality, image processing, encoding and compression for the 
distribution of multimedia contents over different types of networks 
(fixed IP, mobile, etc.). In 2004, project-team TEMICS pushed a technical recommendation through at ISO concerning the JPEG standard. 
INRIA Rennes launched a new collaboration project with INA (National 
Audiovisual Institute) and Thomson on audiovisual indexing. The 
research unit reinforced its partnership with France Telecom with ten 
external research contracts and three cooperative research contract on 
scientific topics in connection with network monitoring, image, 
human/machine dialogue and security in 2004. 

In the field of network and system security for the protocol layers 
and embedded software, INRIA Rennes has acquired a solid experience. 
The research unit intends to collaborate with its academic partners of 
the Rennes site (ENS, ENST, ESE) and industry in such strategic sectors 
as defense, telecommunications and automobile. 

INRIA Rennes is highly involved in the deployment of the Grid 5000 
platform to equip the country with a scientific grid computing tool 
made of 5,000 processors distributed over several nodes. In 2004, 
INRIA Rennes installed a 360 processor node, shortly to be upgraded 
to 500 processors. The new equipment will provide an actual high 
performance, large scale computing and testing platform to validate 
distributed code for such systems. 

Projects and partners 
Key figures 
530 persons, including 
440 scientists 
028 research teams, including 
020 INRIA project-teams 
Most of the projects are joint with CNRS, 
INSA Rennes and the University of Rennes I 
Lannion 
3 teams, including 
1 INRIA project in partnership 
1 with the University of Rennes I 
Nantes 
2 INRIA projects, one with the École des mines 
de Nantes, and the other with the University 
of Nantes. 
Claude Labit, 
Research Unit Director 
28•29



Projects and partners 
Key figures 
500 persons, including 
380 scientists 
028 INRIA project-teams 
40 % of these projects are joint 
with other establishments and 
research departments, such as 
the Center for Applied Mathematics 
(CMA, École des mines), 
the Computer Science, Signal 
and Systems department (I3S) of 
the University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis 
and the J.A. Dieudonné Laboratory 
(CNRS and University of Nice-Sophia 
Antipolis), the Center for Teaching 
and Research in Mathematics, 
Computer Science and Scientific 
Computing (CERMICS, École des 
ponts), the Biological Oceanography 
and Marine Plankton Ecology 
Laboratory (CNRS and University 
Paris VI), the University of Provence, 
the École normale supérieure, 
the Computing, Robotics and 
Microelectronics Department 
(LIRMM) of Montpellier (CNRS 
and University of Montpellier II), 
the University of Montpellier I, INRA. 
Michel Cosnard, 
Research Unit Director 
INRIA SOPHIA ANTIPOLIS: 
at the heart of the largest European 
scientific park 

Sophia Antipolis occupies a singular place within the European high 
tech geography. The research centers of many companies, developers 
and ICST users are installed there, side by side with public institutions 
as well as several engineering schools and universities. 25,000 persons 
work in this area, making up a network of competences and resources 
that is unparalleled in Europe. INRIA has been present at Sophia since 
1983. It is growing sharply with an increasingly close partnership strategy with the companies and institutions that are established there. 
INRIA Sophia Antipolis works in particular with Hitachi, SAP, France 
Telecom, and Texas Instruments, among others. The research unit also 
participates in the development of the scientific park via company creation (a dozen up to this day). It was also instrumental in attracting the 
research centers of foreign companies installed at Sophia. The research 
unit is participating in a project to create an ICST Campus with the universities and engineering schools that would make it possible to bring 
higher education and research closer together. While remaining very 
committed to Sophia Antipolis, especially with two themes--ubiquitous 
computing and life sciences--the research unit intends to expend the 
regional dimension of its work. INRIA Sophia Antipolis thus enquired 
about needs and developments in different fields in Marseille and 
Montpellier. Five research teams are now installed there, partially or 
entirely. INRIA wants to reinforce these localizations on environmental 
and medical themes. 

More than half of the research carried out at Sophia Antipolis concerns 
ubiquitous computing and how to make it reliable, from 
networks to the applications. The research unit is an excellence center 
in the areas of protocols, performance evaluation, the web, embedded 
computing, and network dimensioning. In the latter field, the joint 
project-team CORSO of INRIA and France Télécom was created in 2003. 
The team is installed in the INRIA Sophia Antipolis premises and 
associates research scientists from project-team MASCOTTE(1) and 
France Télécom engineers. 

The life sciences represent an increasingly important part of the 
research effort of INRIA Sophia Antipolis, especially in biology, neurosciences, medicine and environment. Next to specialized project-teams 
(COMORE, DEMAR, etc.) more and more teams are orienting their 
research in this direction. For example, the APICS team applies part of 
its research to the detection of brain lesions for epilepsy. In 2004, the 
project-team ÉPIDAURE concluded a partnership with the Medicine 
School of the University of Nice and two hospitals, the Antoine 
Lacassagne Regional Cancer Center (CAL) and the Nice teaching 
hospital, in the field of medical imaging. Project-team ODYSSÉE(2) 
participated in the project of installing a MEG (magnetoelectroencephalography) equipment at the La Timone hospital in Marseille. A new 
project called MERE (Water modeling and resources) was launched in 
2004 in Montpellier. This is the first partnership of INRIA with INRA. 

(1) MASCOTTE: a joint project with CNRS and the University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis within 
the I3S department. 
(2) ODYSSÉE: a joint project with the École normale supérieure de Paris and the École 
nationale des ponts et chaussées. 

6 research units 


INRIA LORRAINE: 

a dynamics of research and innovation 

The INRIA Lorraine research unit was founded in 1986. It develops 
research projects in collaboration with CNRS and the Lorraine universities with the LORIA (Lorraine Laboratory for Research in Computer 
Science and its Applications), the IECN (Elie-Cartan Institute in Nancy), 
the LMAM (Metz Laboratory for Mathematics and Applications) and the 
LGIPM (Department of Industrial Engineering and Mechanical 
Production in Metz). Some projects are dual-located between Nancy 
and Metz, Strasbourg or Besançon. 
INRIA Lorraine contributes to the coordination of Regional Scientific and 
Technological Group (PRST) called Software Intelligence in the framework of the plan contract between the region and the government. 

The Software Intelligence PRST thus made it possible to bring together 
researchers from LORIA, the ATILF (Analysis and computer processing of 
the French language) and INIST (Institute for Scientific and Technical 
Information) on the theme of language engineering, documents and 
scientific, technical and cultural information, and around a resource 
center for automatic language processing. The competences of the 
Lorraine research unit concern real time recognition of continuous 
speech, syntactic analysis integrating semantic aspects, text mining and 
the representation of structured knowledge. The national R&D initiative 
Syntax and the Lirics European project are pursuing work on the 
standardization of linguistic resources. In 2004, the European Summer 
School in Logic, Language and Information attracted 500 attendees 
in Nancy. 

Several LORIA teams are working on software and computer 
system quality, security and reliability. With industrial and 
academic partners, the TRIO project-team participated in the EAST EEA 
(Electronics Architecture and Software Technology-Embedded Electronic 
Architecture) European project that obtained the ITEA (Information 
Technology for European Advancement) prize in October 2004 for its 
contribution to embedded systems in automobile. The verification of 
cryptographic protocols and network security infrastructures are other 
significant research directions of the research unit. 

In order to combine simulation and visualization, the research 
unit acquired a virtual reality hall for three-dimensional visualization 
and simulation of varied phenomena, in particular in physics, geology 
and biology. 
Thus the CALVI project-team simulates and visualizes plasma fusion, 
in collaboration with physicists from the Henri Poincaré University in 
Nancy. The ISA project-team participated in the Docking cooperative 
research initiative, which resulted in 2004 in a simulation and visualization software for molecule interaction. 
Finally, more and more INRIA Lorraine research scientists are working 
on models and algorithms for bioinformatics and bio-inspired 
computing. 

Hélène Kirchner, 

Research Unit Director 

Projects and partners 
Key figures 
450 persons, including 
340 scientists 
024 research teams including 
021 INRIA project-teams 
All the teams are in partnership: 
¦ within LORIA (Lorraine Laboratory of 
Computer Science Research and Applications),
17 projects in partnership with CNRS, 
the Institut national polytechnique de Lorraine, 
the Henri Poincaré Nancy 1 University 
and Nancy 2 University. 
¦ 3 research projects in applied mathematics, 
within the IECN (Elie Cartan Institute in Nancy), 
in partnership with CNRS, the Henri Poincaré 
Nancy 1 University, Nancy 2 University, 
and Louis Pasteur University in Strasbourg. 
¦ 3 research projects, entirely or partially 
located at Metz, are joint with the University 
of Metz and CNRS. 
30•31



INRIA RHÔNE-ALPES: 

a dual local network of expertise 

In 1992, INRIA launched a new research unit in Grenoble. The region is 
very dynamic in the field of micro- and nanotechnology on the one 
hand, and very much in demand of innovation in ICST on the other 
hand. INRIA Rhône-Alpes quickly found its place in this environment, 
establishing a competence center in computing in partnership with local 
industry and research. The unit extended its development to Lyon, the 
second city in France, in partnership with the École Normale Supérieure 
in particular. Six research teams are currently entirely or partially located Lyon. They work in particular on bioinformatics. The city has one of 
the most important research communities in the life sciences in France. 
In its areas of expertise, INRIA Rhône-Alpes contributed to the creation 
of numerous startups, either by research result transfer, or by helping 
research scientists found their own company. From Polyspace 
Technology in 1998 to Genostar Technologies in 2004, INRIA Rhône-
Alpes contributed to the creation of eleven companies. Other companies 
are currently emerging. The research unit is one of the important 
participants in the GRAIN (Grenoble Alpes Incubation) incubator that 
proposes support and help company founders. 

In Grenoble, INRIA Rhône-Alpes is accompanying the rise of embedded systems in micro- and nanotechnology. It is estimated that in 
2010, there will be twice as many embedded processors--over 12 billion 
--than inhabitants on Earth. The research unit got involved in a project 
called EmSoC (Embedded System on Chip) with the CEA, INRIA, the 
Grenoble academic communities and industry. EmSoC is in the context 
of the development of a competitiveness center on embedded systems. 
Teams are faced with a dual challenge in this project: low consumption 
and software verification to guarantee their quality and reliability. 
Several project-teams contribute to research on embedded systems-
COMPSYS, ARENAIRE, VASY, POPART, SARDES, among others. 

In Lyon, INRIA Rhône-Alpes is developing a competence center in the 
area of computing for biology. HELIX is the oldest and most important INRIA project-team in bioinformatics. It demonstrates the open, 
integrative approach of INRIA Rhône-Alpes by associating biologists, 
computer scientists and mathematicians in a very open process of 
applying mathematical, algorithmic and computing methods to problems in biology. In addition to this research, INRIA Rhône-Alpes got 
involved in a significant training activity in collaboration with the CEA 
and the University. The three partners signed in 2004 an agreement to 
create an ongoing program of training in bioinformatics. 

Several INRIA Rhône-Alpes teams, EVASION, ARTIS, MOVI, E-MOTION, 
PRIMA, I3D, etc., are working on different types of images, virtual 
reality and interaction within the GRAVIR department that associates the University, the INPG, CNRS and INRIA. GRAVIR is hosted by 
INRIA. 

The research unit set up a unique experimentation and development 
service in terms of importance, that manages the whole set of vision, 
robotics and PC cluster platforms, which constitutes an exceptional 
resource centers at the disposal of its teams. 

Projects and partners 
Key figures 
500 persons, including 
300 scientists, 
025 research teams, including 
022 project-teams 
016 in partnership with CNRS, 
the Joseph Fourier University and the 
Institut national polytechnique of Grenoble 
(GRAVIR and ID departments), CNRS and 
the École nationale supérieure of Lyon (LIP 
laboratory), the Claude Bernard University 
and the Institut national 
des sciences appliquées (INSA) of Lyon. 
Bernard Espiau, 
Research Unit Director 

