Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0[contents] [checklist]
 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0
W3C Working Draft 27 April 2006
  This version: 
  http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/WD-WCAG20-20060427/ 
  Latest version: 
  http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 
  Previous version: 
  http://www.w3.org/TR/2005/WD-WCAG20-20051123/ 
  Editors: 
  Ben Caldwell, Trace Research & Development Center, University of 
  Wisconsin-Madison 
  Wendy Chisholm, W3C 
  John Slatin, Accessibility Institute, University of Texas at Austin 
  Gregg Vanderheiden, Trace Research & Development Center, University of 
  Wisconsin-Madison 
This document is also available in these non-normative formats: 
  single HTML file 
Copyright © 2006 W3C ® ( MIT , ERCIM , Keio), All Rights Reserved. W3C 
liability, trademark and document use rules apply.



Abstract
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 (WCAG 2.0) covers a wide range of 
issues and recommendations for making Web content more accessible. This document 
contains principles, guidelines, and success criteria that define and explain 
the requirements for making Web-based information and applications accessible. 
"Accessible" means usable to a wide range of people with disabilities, including 
blindness and low vision, deafness and hearing loss, learning difficulties, 
cognitive limitations, limited movement, speech difficulties, photosensitivity 
and combinations of these. Following these guidelines will also make your Web 
content more accessible to the vast majority of users, including older users. It 
will also enable people to access Web content using many different devices - 
including a wide variety of assistive technologies. 
WCAG 2.0 success criteria are written as testable statements that are not 
technology-specific. Guidance about satisfying the success criteria in specific 
technologies as well as general information about interpreting the success 
criteria are provided in separate documents. An Overview of Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 Last Call Documents is also available. 
Until WCAG 2.0 advances to W3C Recommendation, the current and referenceable 
document is Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (WCAG 1.0), published as a 
W3C Recommendation May 1999.
Status of this Document
This section describes the status of this document at the time of its 
publication. Other documents may supersede this document. A list of current W3C 
publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found in 
the W3C technical reports index at http://www.w3.org/TR/. 
The W3C strongly encourages broad community review of this Last Call Working 
Draft, and submission of comments on any issues which you feel could present a 
significant barrier to future adoption and implementation of WCAG 2.0. In 
particular, we encourage you to comment on the success criteria and the 
conformance model. Reviewers are encouraged to provide suggestions for how to 
address issues as well as supportive feedback and endorsements of the document.
This 27 April 2006 release of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 is a 
Last Call Working Draft by the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines Working 
Group (part of the Web Accessibility Initiative). Publication as a Last Call 
Working Draft indicates that the WCAG WG believes it has addressed all 
substantive issues and that the document is stable. The first public Working 
Draft of WCAG 2.0 was published 25 January 2001. Since then, the WCAG WG has 
published nine Working Drafts, addressed more than 1,000 issues, and developed a 
variety of support information for the guidelines. This publication of WCAG 2.0 
is accompanied by the following documents:
  Understanding WCAG 2.0 - which provides information about each Guideline as 
  well as describing how to meet each Success Criteria.
  Techniques for WCAG 2.0 - which includes sufficient techniques for each 
  success criteria for various Web technologies including HTML, CSS, SMIL and 
  scripting.
After Last Call, the WCAG WG believes that WCAG 2.0 will be ready to move on to 
the remaining stages of the W3C Recommendation Track Process:
  Candidate Recommendation - collect implementation experience on use of WCAG 
  2.0 to design and evaluate Web content for accessibility;
  Proposed Recommendation - seek endorsement of the specification from W3C 
  Member organizations;
  Recommendation - published by W3C as a technical report appropriate for 
  widespread deployment and the promotion of W3C's mission.
Comments on this working draft are due on or before 31 May 2006. To comment, 
please use one of the following standard response formats.
  Web form
  HTML file
  Excel spreadsheet
  Email form
Instructions and downloads for all are available at 
http:///www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG20/comments/. Please send completed forms to 
public-comments-wcag20@w3.org. 
The archives for the public comments list are publicly available. Archives of 
the WCAG WG mailing list discussions are also publicly available.
We are starting to gather implementation examples during this Last Call review 
process. Implementation examples are examples of pages or sites that conform to 
the proposed WCAG 2.0 at various levels of conformance.
This Last Call draft of WCAG 2.0 addresses all the open issues against the 
previous Working Draft. For a detailed list of changes since the last 
publication of this document, please refer to the History of Changes to WCAG 2.0 
Working Drafts.
Publication as a Working Draft does not imply endorsement by the W3C Membership. 
This is a draft document and may be updated, replaced or obsoleted by other 
documents at any time. It is inappropriate to cite this document as other than 
work in progress.
This document was produced by a group operating under the 5 February 2004 W3C 
Patent Policy. W3C maintains a public list of any patent disclosures made in 
connection with the deliverables of the group; that page also includes 
instructions for disclosing a patent. An individual who has actual knowledge of 
a patent which the individual believes contains Essential Claim(s) must disclose 
the information in accordance with section 6 of the W3C Patent Policy.



Table of Contents
  Introduction 
    Related Documents 
    Authoring tools 
    The Role of User Agents 
    The Four Principles of Accessibility 
    Important New Terms Used in WCAG 2.0 
  Conformance 
    Technology assumptions and the "baseline" 
    Conformance levels and the baseline 
    Conformance claims 
    Content that conforms to WCAG 1.0 
    How to refer to WCAG 2.0 from other documents 
  WCAG 2.0 Guidelines 
    Principle 1: Content must be perceivable. 
      Guideline 1.1 Provide text alternatives for all non-text content 
      Guideline 1.2 Provide synchronized alternatives for multimedia 
      Guideline 1.3 Ensure that information and structure can be separated from 
      presentation 
      Guideline 1.4 Make it easy to distinguish foreground information from its 
      background 
    Principle 2: Interface components in the content must be operable 
      Guideline 2.1 Make all functionality operable via a keyboard interface 
      Guideline 2.2 Allow users to control time limits on their reading or 
      interaction 
      Guideline 2.3 Allow users to avoid content that could cause seizures due 
      to photosensitivity 
      Guideline 2.4 Provide mechanisms to help users find content, orient 
      themselves within it, and navigate through it 
      Guideline 2.5 Help users avoid mistakes and make it easy to correct 
      mistakes that do occur 
    Principle 3: Content and controls must be understandable 
      Guideline 3.1 Make text content readable and understandable. 
      Guideline 3.2 Make the placement and functionality of content predictable. 

    Principle 4: Content should be robust enough to work with current and future 
    user agents (including assistive technologies) 
      Guideline 4.1 Support compatibility with current and future user agents 
      (including assistive technologies) 
      Guideline 4.2 Ensure that content is accessible or provide an accessible 
      alternative 
Appendices
  Appendix A: Glossary (Normative) 
  Appendix B: Checklist 
  Appendix C: Acknowledgements 
  Appendix D: Comparison of WCAG 1.0 checkpoints to WCAG 2.0 
  Appendix E: References 



Introduction 
This section is informative. 
You are reading the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) version 2.0. 
This is the central document that defines the requirements for making Web 
content accessible to a wide range of people with disabilities, including 
blindness and low vision, deafness and hearing loss, learning difficulties, 
cognitive limitations, limited movement, speech difficulties, and others. 
Following these guidelines will also make your Web content more usable to many 
other users, including older users. It will also enable people to access Web 
content using many different devices - including a wide variety of assistive 
technologies and mobile technologies.
WCAG 2.0 covers a wide range of recommendations for making Web content more 
accessible. The guidelines do not include standard usability recommendations 
except where they have specific impact on accessibility.
The WCAG 2.0 document itself consists of: 
  This introduction
  Information about conformance to WCAG 2.0 
  Guidelines with success criteria for each guideline
  "How to meet" links to information on intent, sufficient techniques, examples, 
  and benefits for each success criterion
  A link to information about the Working Group's approach to defining baseline 
  assumptions about the technologies that are available to end users
  Appendices containing definitions, a checklist, references, and other support 
  information.
Related Documents
In addition to WCAG 2.0 (this document) there are a number of related support 
documents that provide additional information and examples. These other 
documents are informative only and do not define conformance to WCAG 2.0. Only 
this document (WCAG 2.0) is normative. That is, only this document can be used 
for determining conformance to these guidelines. Readers should consult WCAG 2.0 
in order to determine the exact wording of the success criteria and for 
information about documenting conformance.
The other documents in this set are provided to help readers understand WCAG 2.0 
and how to produce conforming content. These informative documents are written 
to be used by a diverse audience, including but not limited to:
  people who create Web content 
  developers who write code
  Quality assurance or accessibility evaluators 
  policy makers
  managers
  users
Currently, these informative documents include:
  Essential Components of Web Accessibility - Explains how the Web Content 
  Accessibility Guidelines work with the other WAI guidelines (the User Agent 
  Accessibility Guidelines and the Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines) and 
  with assistive technologies to provide access to the Web by people with 
  disabilities.
  Overview of Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 Documents - 
  Provides an overview of WCAG 2.0 and its various informative support 
documents.
  About Baselines for WCAG 2.0 - Provides additional information on baselines.
  Understanding WCAG 2.0 - Provides information about each success criterion, 
  including:
    its intent,
    key terms from the WCAG 2.0 Glossary needed to understand the success 
    criterion,
    names of and links to techniques that the working group deems sufficient to 
    meet the success criterion, and
    examples and benefits of the success criterion.
  Note: Each of the "How to meet SC x.x.x" links in WCAG 2.0 links to the 
  relevant section of the Understanding WCAG 2.0 document.
  Techniques for WCAG 2.0 - Provide specific details on different techniques, 
  including examples, code, and tests.
  Note: The development of techniques documents is an ongoing process. 
  Developers are encouraged to submit new techniques at any time. 
  Application Notes - Provide detailed application information in different 
  areas. For example, an application note on forms will provide a collection of 
  techniques, and strategies for creating accessible forms. It will also 
  summarize the different success criteria that relate to forms.
  Note: Application notes are a future component that will be developed in 
  conjunction with the Education and Outreach Working Group.
The Working Group plans to publish a number of other technology-specific 
techniques documents and encourages development of techniques documents that 
show how to meet WCAG 2.0 using non-W3C technologies. Please visit the Working 
Group home page for a complete list of these and other informative documents 
related to WCAG 2.0.
Every attempt has been made to make WCAG 2.0 and the related documents listed 
above as readable and usable as possible while retaining the accuracy and 
clarity needed in a technical specification. Sometimes technical terms are 
needed for clarity or testability. In these cases, the terms are defined in 
Appendix A: Glossary . To assist readers, there is a How to Meet link beside 
every success criterion that puts readers one click away from detailed 
information on that success criterion and two clicks away from the specific 
technique descriptions related to the success criterion.
The Working Group recognizes that readers who are new to accessibility may need 
or want additional information. For these readers, the work of the Web 
Accessibility Initiative and its Education and Outreach Working Group is highly 
recommended. The articles called Getting Started: Making a Web Site Accessible 
and How People with Disabilities Use the Web are especially useful. 
Authoring tools
A large part of Web content is created using authoring tools. These tools often 
determine how Web content is implemented, either by making authoring decisions 
directly or by limiting the choices available to the author. As a result, 
authoring tools will play an important role in creating Web content that 
conforms to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines. At the same time, we 
recommend that all authors become familiar with the Guidelines because this will 
help in creating accessible content and coverage of the Guidelines may vary 
between tools.
Developers of authoring tools can make their tools aware of the Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines by following the Authoring Tool Accessibility 
Guidelines. The working group encourages users and purchasers of authoring tools 
to consider conformance to the Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines as a 
criterion when selecting tools. The current version at WCAG 2.0's release is 
Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 1.0. However, version 2.0 is nearing 
completion and it is based on WCAG 2.0. The latest version of the Authoring Tool 
Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 can be found at http://www.w3.org/TR/ATAG20.
The Role of User Agents
Web content is always rendered by a user agent. A user agent is any software 
that retrieves and renders Web content for users and includes assistive 
technologies. Web content that conforms to WCAG 2.0 is most likely to be 
rendered correctly by user agents that conform to the User Agent Accessibility 
Guidelines (UAAG). For more information about the relationship between WCAG 2.0 
and other WAI accessibility guidelines, see Essential Components of Web 
Accessibility.
The Four Principles of Accessibility
The WCAG 2.0 Guidelines are organized around the following four principles:
  Content must be perceivable
  Interface components in the content must be operable
  Content and controls must be understandable
  Content should be robust enough to work with current and future user agents 
  (including assistive technologies)
These four principles lay the foundation necessary for anyone to access and use 
Web content. WCAG 2.0 offers information about how to increase the ability of 
people with disabilities to perceive, operate, and understand Web content. Under 
each principle there is a list of guidelines that address the principle. Under 
each guideline there are success criteria used to evaluate conformance to this 
standard for that guideline. The success criteria are written as statements that 
will be either true or false when specific Web content is tested against the 
success criteria. The success criteria are grouped into three levels of 
conformance, each representing a higher level of accessibility for that 
guideline.
The principles, guidelines, and success criteria represent concepts that address 
accessibility issues and needs, regardless of the technology used. They are not 
specific to HTML, XML, or any other technology. This approach makes it possible 
to apply WCAG 2.0 to a variety of situations and technologies, including those 
that do not yet exist. 
The principles and guidelines give direction and guidance to Web authors. The 
success criteria are written as true/false statements so that they can be used 
in determining conformance. Only the success criteria are testable.
Important New Terms Used in WCAG 2.0
WCAG 2.0 includes several important new terms. These terms are defined in the 
Glossary ( Appendix A: Glossary ), and links to the definitions are provided 
whenever these and other important terms are used in the success criteria. The 
terms are introduced briefly here to make this new vocabulary easier to 
understand. 
"Web unit" is one of these important new terms. Web pages are the most common 
type of Web unit. The broader term was chosen because it covers Web applications 
and other types of content to which the word "page" may not apply. A Web unit is 
any collection of information, consisting of one or more resources, intended to 
be rendered together, and identified by a single Uniform Resource Identifier 
(such as a URL). For example, A Web page containing several images and a style 
sheet is a typical Web unit. 
Several success criteria require that content (or certain aspects of content) 
can be "programmatically determined." This means that the author is responsible 
for ensuring that the content is delivered in such a way that software can 
access it. This is important in order to allow assistive technologies to 
recognize it and present it to the user, even if the user requires a different 
sensory modality than the original. For example, some assistive technologies 
convert text into speech or braille. This will also allow content in the future 
to be translated into simpler forms for people with cognitive disabilities, or 
to allow access by other agent based technologies. This can happen only if the 
content itself can be programmatically determined. 
WCAG 2.0 also introduces the term "baseline” which allows WCAG 2.0 to adapt to 
changing technologies and to the needs of different countries and environments. 
Baselines are described in more detail in the conformance section and in About 
Baselines for WCAG 2.0. 
Conformance
This section is normative. 
Conformance means that Web content satisfies the success criteria defined in 
this document. This section outlines the conformance scheme used throughout this 
document.
The success criteria for each guideline are organized into three (3) levels.
  Level 1 success criteria: 
    Achieve a minimum level of accessibility.
    Can reasonably be applied to all Web content.
  Level 2 success criteria: 
    Achieve an enhanced level of accessibility.
    Can reasonably be applied to all Web content.
  Level 3 success criteria: 
    Achieve additional accessibility enhancements.
    Can not necessarily be applied to all Web content.
Note 1: Because not all level 3 success criteria can be used with all types of 
content, Triple-A conformance only requires conformance to a portion of level 3 
success criteria.
Note 2: Guidelines do not necessarily contain success criteria at every level. 
Some have success criteria at only one level.
This method of grouping success criteria differs in important ways from the 
approach taken in WCAG 1.0. Each checkpoint in WCAG 1.0 was assigned a 
"priority" according to its impact on accessibility. Thus, Priority 3 
checkpoints appeared to be less important than Priority 1 checkpoints. The WCAG 
Working Group believes that all success criteria of WCAG 2.0 are essential for 
some people. Thus, the system of checkpoints and priorities used in WCAG 1.0 has 
been replaced by success criteria under Levels 1, 2, and 3 as described above. 
Note that even conformance to all three levels will not make Web content 
accessible to all people.
All WCAG 2.0 success criteria are testable. While some can be tested by computer 
programs, others must be tested by qualified human testers. Sometimes, a 
combination of computer programs and qualified human testers may be used. When 
people who understand WCAG 2.0 test the same content using the same success 
criteria, the same results should be obtained with high inter-rater reliability.
Note: For each success criterion, there is a list of techniques deemed by the 
Working Group to be sufficient to meet the requirement. For each technique, 
there is a test to determine whether the technique has been successfully 
implemented. If the test(s) for a "sufficient" technique or combination of 
techniques is passed, then the Working Group would consider that success 
criterion met. However, passing all tests for all techniques is not necessary. 
Nor is it necessary to meet a success criterion using one of the sufficient 
techniques. There may be other techniques which are not documented by the 
working group that would also meet the success criterion.
Technology assumptions and the "baseline"
WCAG 2.0 defines accessibility guidelines (goals) and success criteria (testable 
criteria for conformance at different levels of accessibility). The guidelines 
and success criteria are described in a technology-independent way in order to 
allow conformance using any Web technology that supports accessibility. WCAG 
2.0, therefore, does not require or prohibit the use of any specific technology. 
It is possible to conform to WCAG 2.0 using both W3C and non-W3C technologies, 
as long as the technologies are supported by accessible user agents, including 
assistive technologies.
WCAG 2.0 uses the term user agent to mean: Any software that retrieves and 
renders Web content for users. This may include Web browsers, media players, 
plug-ins, and other programs - including assistive technologies - that help in 
retrieving and rendering Web content. It is important to note that assistive 
technologies are included in this definition. Assistive technologies include 
screen readers, screen magnifiers, on-screen and alternative keyboards, single 
switches, voice recognition, and a wide variety of input and output devices that 
meet the needs of people with disabilities.
Choosing baseline technologies
In choosing Web technologies (HTML, scripting, etc.) that will be used when 
building content, authors need to know what technologies they can assume will be 
supported by, and active in, the user agents (including assistive technologies) 
that people with disabilities will be using. If authors rely on technologies 
that are not supported, then their content may not be accessible.
The set of such technologies that an author assumes are supported and turned on 
in accessible user agents is called a baseline. Authors must ensure that all 
information and functionality of the Web content conforms to WCAG 2.0 assuming 
that user agents support all of the technologies in the baseline and that they 
are enabled. Non-baseline technologies can also be used, but all information and 
functionality of the Web content must conform both with all non-baseline 
technologies turned on and with the technologies turned off. Both conditions are 
necessary since some users many have browsers that support them while others may 
not. 
Note: See also Use of technologies outside of the baseline .
Who sets baselines?
Baselines may be set by many different entities including (but not limited to) 
authors, organizations, customers, and governmental bodies. 
WCAG 2.0 does not specify any particular baseline. There are several reasons for 
this. First, what is appropriate in a baseline may differ for different 
environments. For example, in the case of content that will be viewed only by 
employees of a particular company, it may be possible to assume that user agents 
support more advanced technologies if the company provides the necessary user 
agents (including assistive technology) to all employees. For public Websites, 
however, a more conservative level of technology may be all that can be 
reasonably assumed. Baselines may also vary by jurisdiction (for example, state, 
country, etc.). Finally, the level of technology that can be assumed to be 
supported by accessible user agents will certainly change over time.
Some examples of scenarios leading to different baselines:
Example 1: A government site that provides information to the public. A 
government agency publishes information intended for the general public. The 
specified baseline includes only technologies that have been widely supported by 
more than one accessible and affordable user agent for more than one release. 
The government periodically changes the baseline it requires for authors of 
public sites to reflect the increasing ability of affordable user agents 
(including assistive technology) to work with newer technologies.
Example 2: A particular government provides high level accessible user agents to 
all citizens who need them. A government provides all citizens with user agents 
that support newer technologies. The government is thus able to specify a 
baseline that includes these newer technologies for all of its Web sites for its 
citizens since the government can assume its citizens' user agents can handle 
the technologies. 
Example 3: A private intranet. An organization (public or private) provides its 
employees with the information technology tools they need to do their jobs. The 
baseline for intranet sites used only by employees includes newer technologies 
that are supported only by the user agent that the organization provides for its 
employees. Because the company controls the user agents that will view its 
internal content, the author has a very accurate knowledge of the technologies 
that those user agents (including assistive technologies) support.
Note: Baselines are not specified in terms of specific user agents, but in terms 
of the Web content technologies that are supported and enabled in those user 
agents (including assistive technologies).
Use of technologies outside of the baseline
Authors may use technologies that are not in the specified baseline provided 
that the authors do not rely exclusively on those technologies for conveying any 
information or functionality. Also, the presence of the other technologies must 
not block the ability of the users to access the content via the technologies in 
the baseline. Specifically, the following must be true:
  All content and functionality are available using only the technologies in the 
  specified baseline.
  The non-baseline technologies do not interfere with (break or block access to) 
  the content 
    when used with user agents that only support the baseline technologies 
    when used with user agents that support both the baseline and the additional 
    technologies. 
Additional (non-normative) information on baselines can be found at About 
Baselines for WCAG 2.0.
Conformance levels and the baseline
  WCAG 2.0 conformance at level A means that all Level 1 success criteria in the 
  guidelines are met assuming user agent support for only the technologies in 
  the specified baseline. 
  WCAG 2.0 conformance at level Double-A (AA) means that all Level 1 and all 
  Level 2 success criteria in the guidelines are met assuming user agent support 
  for only the technologies in the specified baseline. 
  WCAG 2.0 conformance at level Triple-A (AAA) means that all Level 1, Level 2 
  and at least half (50%) of the Level 3 success criteria that apply to the 
  content types used are met assuming user agent support for only the 
  technologies in the specified baseline. 
If a success criterion relates to a feature, component or type of content that 
is not used in the content (for example, there is no multimedia on the site), 
then that success criterion is met automatically.
Conformance claims
Conformance claims apply to Web units, and sets of Web units. (Web units often 
take the form of a traditional Web page but can also take the form of a fully 
interactive and immersive environment.)
Required components of a conformance claim
Conformance claims are not required. However, if you make a conformance claim 
then the conformance claim must include the following assertions:
  The date of the claim
  The guidelines title/version: "Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0" 
  The URI of the guidelines: http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-WCAG20-YYYYMMDD/ 
  Note: The correct date will replace "YYYYMMDD" when WCAG 2.0 is published as a 
  W3C Recommendation.
  The conformance level satisfied: (Level A, AA or AAA) 
  The baseline used to make the conformance claim. (The baseline technologies 
  can be listed in the conformance claim, or, if the baseline is published 
  elsewhere, the conformance claim can cite the baseline and provide a URI 
  pointing to it.) 
  Scope of the claim (a URI, list of URI's, or a set of URIs defined by a 
  regular expression) 
Optional components of a conformance claim: 
  A list of additional success criteria that have been met beyond a standard 
  claim
  A list of the specific technologies "relied upon" to create the content for 
  which the claim is being made. (This includes markup languages, style sheet 
  languages, scripting/programming languages, image formats, and multimedia 
  formats.)
    "Relied upon" means that the content would not meet WCAG 2.0 at the claimed 
    level if that technology is turned off or not supported)
    o All of the technologies that are 'relied upon' must be in the baseline.
  A list of the specific technologies that are "used but not relied upon"
    If a technology is "used but not relied upon," the content would still meet 
    WCAG 2.0 at the stated conformance level even if that technology is turned 
    off or not supported.
  A list of user agents that the content has been tested on. This should include 
  assistive technologies.
  Information about audience assumptions or target audience. This could include 
  language, geographic information, or other pertinent information about the 
  intended audience. The target audience information CANNOT specify anything 
  related to disability or to physical, sensory or cognitive requirements. 
Examples of conformance claims:
Example 1: On 23 March 2005, http://www.wondercall.example.com conforms to W3C's 
WCAG 2.0, Conformance Level A. The baseline for this claim is HTML 4.01. The 
specification that this content "relies upon" is: HTML 4.01. The specifications 
that this content "uses but does not rely on" are: CSS2, and gif. This content 
was tested using the following user agents and assistive technologies: Firefox 
1.5 on Windows 2000 SP4 with Jaws 7.0, Firefox 1.5 on Windows XP SP 2 with Jaws 
7.0, IE 6.0 on Windows 2000 SP4 with Jaws 4.51, IE 6.0 on Windows 2000 SP4 with 
Jaws 7.0, and Firefox 1.5 on Windows XP SP2 with Jaws 7.0, Safari 2.0 with OS X 
10.4.
Example 2: On 5 May 2006, "G7: An Introduction" 
http://telcor.example.com/nav/G7/intro.html conforms to W3C's WCAG 2.0. 
Conformance Level Double-A. The following additional success criteria have also 
been met: 1.1.2, 1.2.5, and 1.4.3. The baseline for this claim is 
UDBaseline#1-2006 at http://UDLabs.org/Baseline#1-2006.html. The specification 
that this content "relies upon" is: XHTML 1.0 (Strict), and Real Video. The 
specifications that this content "uses but does not rely on" are: JavaScript 
1.2, CSS2.
Example 3: On 21 June 2007, http://example.com/nav and http://example.com/docs 
conform to W3C's WCAG 2.0, Conformance Triple-A. The baseline is 
ISA-Baseline#2-2007 at http://ISA.example.gov/Baselines/BL2-2007. The 
specifications that this content "relies upon" are: XHTML 1.0 (Strict), CSS2, 
JavaScript 1.2, jpeg, png. " The technologies this content has been tested with 
can be found at http://example.com/docs/WCAG20/test/technologies.html.
Conformance notes
A Web unit conforms to WCAG 2.0 at a given conformance level only if all content 
provided by that Web unit (including any secondary resources that are rendered 
as part of the Web unit) conforms at that level.
Note: If multiple representations can be retrieved from a URI through content 
negotiation, then the conformance claim would be for the Web unit that is 
returned when no negotiation is conducted (unless the server returns an error 
for that condition, in which case one of the negotiated forms must comply) 
(Refer to success criterion 4.2.1 .)
Aggregated content
Sometimes, a Web unit is assembled ("aggregated") from multiple sources that 
each may or may not have their own level of conformance. They may in fact not 
even be Web units of any kind - and thus would not, and sometimes could not, 
conform to all of the success criteria by themselves. Authored units are defined 
as "some set of material created as a single entity by an author". The 
conformance level for a Web unit that contains authored units is equal to the 
lowest conformance level claimed for the Web unit content and any of the 
authored units it contains - including any claims pertaining to aggregated 
authored units. If individual authored units do not carry a conformance claim, 
then the claim must be based on the Web unit with the authored units in place.
Scoping of conformance claims
Conformance claims can be limited, or "scoped," to apply to only some parts of a 
Web site. Scoping by URI to exclude sections of a site is allowed so that 
authors can make claims for just some parts of a site. Example 3 above is a 
scoped conformance claim. Scoping cannot exclude a particular type of content 
(for example, images or scripts) since it would allow exclusion of individual 
success criteria. 
While scoping can include and exclude parts of a site, processes (such as 
shopping) and authored units must be considered in their entirety. If part of a 
Web unit that is part of a process or task does not conform at some level, then 
no conformance claim can be made at that level for any Web unit in that process. 
The same applies to authored units.
Example 1: An online store has a series of pages that are used to select and 
purchase products. All pages in the series must conform in order to claim 
conformance for any page that is part of the sequence.
Example 2: A site has a collection of videos for which it is not required to and 
does not want to claim accessibility. The videos are located in one location 
(e.g., example.com/movies.php). The conformance claim for the site or section of 
the site excludes the location that contains the videos. The conformance claim 
is valid as long as the Web units to which it applies only link to the videos 
instead of displaying them as part of the page (that is, as long as the videos 
are not treated as embedded content within a page for which conformance is being 
claimed).
Note 1: Linking to non-conforming content is not prohibited. Linking to 
non-conformant content is allowed, except when one of the following is true:
  the content is rendered together with the Web page (or other Web unit), or
  the content is itself a Web unit within the set of URIs to which the 
  conformance claim applies, or
  the content is a Web unit that is part of a process for which a claim is made.
Note 2: In any of these cases, the content would have to meet the guidelines in 
order for the claim to be valid.
This scoping provision does not preclude an organization, customer, or 
government from requiring that all parts of a site be accessible and meet some 
conformance level of WCAG 2.0. WCAG 2.0 does not require that full Web sites 
conform, although that is certainly desirable.
Content that conforms to WCAG 1.0
This Working Draft of WCAG 2.0 builds upon WCAG 1.0 and reflects feedback 
received since the publication of WCAG 1.0 in May 1999.
The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines Working Group is working to ensure that 
organizations and individuals who are currently using WCAG 1.0 (which remains 
stable and normative at this time) will be able to smoothly transition to WCAG 
2.0. For more information about the similarities and differences between WCAG 
1.0 Checkpoints and WCAG 2.0 Guidelines and success criteria, please refer to 
Appendix D: Comparison of WCAG 1.0 checkpoints to WCAG 2.0 . 
Authors whose content currently conforms to WCAG 1.0 may wish to capitalize on 
past accessibility efforts when making the transition to WCAG 2.0. A qualified 
conformance statement could allow them this flexibility. For example, a 
conformance claim might include the following statement: "Materials with 
creation or modification dates before 31 December 2006 conform to WCAG 1.0 Level 
AA. Materials with creation or modification dates after 31 December 2006 conform 
to WCAG 2.0 Level AA."
How to refer to WCAG 2.0 from other documents
Information references
When referencing WCAG 2.0 in an informational fashion, the following format can 
be used.
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, W3C World Wide Web Consortium 
Recommendation XX Month Year. (http://www.w3.org/TR/200X/REC-WCAG20-YYYYMMDD/, 
Latest version at http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/) 
When referring to WCAG 2.0 from another standard with a "should" statement
When referencing WCAG 2.0 from within a should statement in a standard (or 
advisory statement in a regulation), then the full WCAG 2.0 should be 
referenced. This would mean that all three levels of WCAG 2.0 should be 
considered but that none are required. The format for referencing WCAG 2.0 from 
a "should" statement therefore, is:
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, W3C World Wide Web Consortium 
Recommendation XX Month Year. (http://www.w3.org/TR/200X/REC-WCAG20-YYYYMMDD/) 
When referring to WCAG 2.0 from another standard with a "shall" statement
When citing WCAG 2.0 as part of a requirement (e.g., a shall statement in a 
standard or regulation), the reference must include the specific parts of WCAG 
2.0 that are intended to be required . When referencing WCAG 2.0 in this manner, 
the following rules apply:
  Conformance at any level of WCAG 2.0 requires that all of the Level 1 success 
  criteria be met. References to WCAG 2.0 can not be for any subset of Level 1.
  Beyond Level 1, a "shall" reference may include any subset of provisions in 
  Levels 2 and 3. That is, it is possible to require "all of Level 1 and [some 
  specific list of success criteria in Level 2 and Level 3]" be met.
  If Double-A conformance to WCAG 2.0 is specified, then all Level 1 and all 
  Level 2 success criteria must be met.
  If Triple-A conformance to WCAG 2.0 is specified, then all Level 1, and all 
  Level 2 success criteria as well as at least 50% of the Level 3 success 
  criteria that apply to the content types used must be met.
Examples
To cite only the Level 1 success criteria (Single-A conformance): 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, W3C World Wide Web Consortium 
Recommendation XX Month Year, Level 1 success criteria. 
(http://www.w3.org/TR/200X/REC-WCAG20-YYYYMMDD/) 
To cite the Levels 1 and 2 success criteria (Double-A conformance): 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, W3C World Wide Web Consortium 
Recommendation XX Month Year, Level 1 & Level 2 success criteria. 
(http://www.w3.org/TR/200X/REC-WCAG20-YYYYMMDD/) 
To cite Level 1 success criteria and selected success criteria from Level 2 and 
Level 3: 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, W3C World Wide Web Consortium 
Recommendation XX Month Year, Level 1 success criteria plus Success Criteria 
1.x.x, 2.y.y, … 3.z.z. (http://www.w3.org/TR/200X/REC-WCAG20-YYYYMMDD/) 
Note: It is not recommended that Triple-A conformance ever be required for 
entire sites. 
Example of use of a WCAG reference in a "shall" statement. 
All Web content on publicly available Web sites shall conform to Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, W3C World Wide Web Consortium Recommendation XX 
Month Year, Level 1 success criteria plus Success Criteria 1.3.3, 1.3.4, 1.4.1, 
2.4.2-6, 3.1.6 (http://www.w3.org/TR/200X/REC-WCAG20-YYYYMMDD/)
Referring to content from WCAG support documents
Techniques, which are listed in Understanding WCAG 2.0 and described in other 
supporting documents, are not part of the normative WCAG 2.0 Recommendation and 
should not be cited using the citation for the WCAG 2.0 Recommendation itself. 
References to techniques in support documents should be cited separately.
Techniques can be cited based on the individual Technique document or on the 
master WCAG 2.0 Techniques document. For example, the technique "Using alt 
attributes on img elements" could be cited as
"Using alt attributes on img elements", W3C World Wide Web Consortium Note. 
(URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-WCAG20-TECHS/UsingAltOnImg.html/) 
or
W3C World Wide Web Consortium (200x): WCAG2.0 HTML Techniques (URL: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-WCAG20-TECHS/HTMLTechs.html) 
Note: Techniques are not designed to be referenced as "required" from any 
standard or regulation.
WCAG 2.0 Guidelines
This section is normative.
Principle 1: Content must be perceivable.
Guideline 1.1 Provide text alternatives for all non-text content
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.1 
1.1.1 For all non-text content, one of the following is true: [How to meet 
1.1.1] 
  If non-text content presents information or responds to user input, text 
  alternatives serve the same purpose and present the same information as the 
  non-text content. If text alternatives cannot serve the same purpose, then 
  text alternatives at least identify the purpose of the non-text content.
  If non-text content is multimedia; live audio-only or live video-only content; 
  a test or exercise that must use a particular sense; or primarily intended to 
  create a specific sensory experience; then text alternatives at least identify 
  the non-text content with a descriptive text label. (For multimedia, see also 
  Guideline 1.2 Provide synchronized alternatives for multimedia .)
  If the purpose of non-text content is to confirm that content is being 
  operated by a person rather than a computer, different forms are provided to 
  accommodate multiple disabilities.
  If non-text content is pure decoration, or used only for visual formatting, or 
  if it is not presented to users, it is implemented such that it can be ignored 
  by assistive technology.
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.1
(No level 2 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.1 
(No level 3 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Guideline 1.1 (text-equiv) Issues 
Guideline 1.2 Provide synchronized alternatives for multimedia
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.2
1.2.1 Captions are provided for prerecorded multimedia. [How to meet 1.2.1] 
1.2.2 Audio descriptions of video, or a full multimedia text alternative 
including any interaction, are provided for prerecorded multimedia. [How to meet 
1.2.2] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.2 
1.2.3 Audio descriptions of video are provided for prerecorded multimedia. [How 
to meet 1.2.3] 
1.2.4 Captions are provided for live multimedia. [How to meet 1.2.4] 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.2 
1.2.5 Sign language interpretation is provided for multimedia. [How to meet 
1.2.5] 
1.2.6 Extended audio descriptions of video are provided for prerecorded 
multimedia. [How to meet 1.2.6] 
1.2.7 For prerecorded multimedia, a full multimedia text alternative including 
any interaction is provided. [How to meet 1.2.7] 
Guideline 1.2 (media-equiv) Issues 
Guideline 1.3 Ensure that information and structure can be separated from 
presentation
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.3
1.3.1 Information and relationships conveyed through presentation can be 
programmatically determined, and notification of changes to these is available 
to user agents, including assistive technologies. [How to meet 1.3.1] 
1.3.2 Any information that is conveyed by color is also visually evident without 
color. [How to meet 1.3.2] 
1.3.3 When the sequence of the content affects its meaning, that sequence can be 
programmatically determined. [How to meet 1.3.3] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.3 
1.3.4 Information that is conveyed by variations in presentation of text is also 
conveyed in text, or the variations in presentation of text can be 
programmatically determined. [How to meet 1.3.4] 
1.3.5 Information required to understand and operate content does not rely on 
shape, size, visual location, or orientation of components. [How to meet 1.3.5] 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.3 
(No level 3 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Guideline 1.3 (content-structure-separation) Issues 
Guideline 1.4 Make it easy to distinguish foreground information from its 
background 
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.4
(No level 1 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.4
1.4.1 Text or diagrams, and their background, have a luminosity contrast ratio 
of at least 5:1. [How to meet 1.4.1] 
1.4.2 A mechanism is available to turn off background audio that plays 
automatically, without requiring the user to turn off all audio. [How to meet 
1.4.2] 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 1.4 
1.4.3 Text or diagrams, and their background, have a luminosity contrast ratio 
of at least 10:1. [How to meet 1.4.3] 
1.4.4 Audio content does not contain background sounds, background sounds can be 
turned off, or background sounds are at least 20 decibels lower than the 
foreground audio content, with the exception of occasional sound effects. [How 
to meet 1.4.4] 
Note: A 20 decibel difference in sound level is roughly four times (4x) quieter 
or louder. Background sound that meets this requirement will be approximately 
four times (4x) quieter than the foreground audio content.
Guideline 1.4 (visual-audio-contrast) Issues 
Principle 2: Interface components in the content must be operable
Guideline 2.1 Make all functionality operable via a keyboard interface
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.1
2.1.1 All functionality of the content is operable in a non-time-dependent 
manner through a keyboard interface, except where the task requires analog, 
time-dependent input. [How to meet 2.1.1] 
Note: This does not preclude and should not discourage the support of other 
input methods (such as a mouse) in addition to keyboard operation.
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.1 
(No level 2 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.1 
2.1.2 All functionality of the content is operable in a non-time-dependent 
manner through a keyboard interface. [How to meet 2.1.2] 
Guideline 2.1 (keyboard-operation) Issues 
Guideline 2.2 Allow users to control time limits on their reading or interaction
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.2
2.2.1 For each time-out that is a function of the content, at least one of the 
following is true: [How to meet 2.2.1] 
  the user is allowed to deactivate the time-out; or
  the user is allowed to adjust the time-out over a wide range that is at least 
  ten times the length of the default setting; or
  the user is warned before time expires and given at least 20 seconds to extend 
  the time-out with a simple action (for example, "hit any key"), and the user 
  is allowed to extend the timeout at least ten times; or
  the time-out is an important part of a real-time event (for example, an 
  auction), and no alternative to the time-out is possible; or
  the time-out is part of an activity where timing is essential (for example, 
  competitive gaming or time-based testing) and time limits can not be extended 
  further without invalidating the activity.
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.2 
2.2.2 Content does not blink for more than three seconds, or a method is 
available to stop all blinking content in the Web unit or authored component. 
[How to meet 2.2.2] 
Note: For requirements related to flickering or flashing content, refer to 
Guideline 2.3 Allow users to avoid content that could cause seizures due to 
photosensitivity .
2.2.3 Content can be paused by the user unless the timing or movement is part of 
an activity where timing or movement is essential. [How to meet 2.2.3] 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.2 
2.2.4 Except for real-time events, timing is not an essential part of the event 
or activity presented by the content. [How to meet 2.2.4] 
2.2.5 Interruptions, such as updated content, can be postponed or suppressed by 
the user, except interruptions involving an emergency. [How to meet 2.2.5] 
2.2.6 When an authenticated session expires, the user can continue the activity 
without loss of data after re-authenticating. [How to meet 2.2.6] 
Guideline 2.2 (time-limits) Issues 
Guideline 2.3 Allow users to avoid content that could cause seizures due to 
photosensitivity
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.3
2.3.1 Content does not violate the general flash threshold or the red flash 
threshold. [How to meet 2.3.1] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.3 
(No level 2 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.3 
2.3.2 Web units do not contain any components that flash more than three times 
in any 1-second period. [How to meet 2.3.2] 
Guideline 2.3 (seizure) Issues 
Guideline 2.4 Provide mechanisms to help users find content, orient themselves 
within it, and navigate through it
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.4
2.4.1 A mechanism is available to bypass blocks of content that are repeated on 
multiple Web units. [How to meet 2.4.1] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.4
2.4.2 More than one way is available to locate content within a set of Web units 
where content is not the result of, or a step in, a process or task. [How to 
meet 2.4.2] 
2.4.3 Web units have titles. [How to meet 2.4.3] 
2.4.4 Each link is programmatically associated with text from which its purpose 
can be determined. [How to meet 2.4.4] 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.4 
2.4.5 Titles, headings, and labels are descriptive. [How to meet 2.4.5] 
2.4.6 When a Web unit or authored component is navigated sequentially, 
components receive focus in an order that follows relationships and sequences in 
the content. [How to meet 2.4.6] 
2.4.7 Information about the user's location within a set of Web units is 
available. [How to meet 2.4.7] 
2.4.8 The purpose of each link can be programmatically determined from the link. 
[How to meet 2.4.8] 
Guideline 2.4 (navigation-mechanisms) Issues 
Guideline 2.5 Help users avoid mistakes and make it easy to correct mistakes 
that do occur
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.5
2.5.1 If an input error is detected, the error is identified and described to 
the user in text. [How to meet 2.5.1] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.5
2.5.2 If an input error is detected and suggestions for correction are known and 
can be provided without jeopardizing the security or purpose of the content, the 
suggestions are provided to the user. [How to meet 2.5.2] 
2.5.3 For forms that cause legal or financial transactions to occur, that modify 
or delete data in data storage systems, or that submit test responses, at least 
one of the following is true: [How to meet 2.5.3] 
  Actions are reversible.
  Actions are checked for input errors before going on to the next step in the 
  process.
  The user is able to review and confirm or correct information before 
  submitting it.
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 2.5 
2.5.4 Context-sensitive help is available for text input. [How to meet 2.5.4] 
Guideline 2.5 (minimize-error) Issues 
Principle 3: Content and controls must be understandable
Guideline 3.1 Make text content readable and understandable.
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 3.1
3.1.1 The primary natural language or languages of the Web unit can be 
programmatically determined. [How to meet 3.1.1] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 3.1 
3.1.2 The natural language of each passage or phrase in the Web unit can be 
programmatically determined. [How to meet 3.1.2] 
Note: This requirement does not apply to individual words or phrases that have 
become part of the primary language of the content.
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 3.1 
3.1.3 A mechanism is available for identifying specific definitions of words or 
phrases used in an unusual or restricted way, including idioms and jargon. [How 
to meet 3.1.3] 
3.1.4 A mechanism for finding the expanded form of abbreviations is available. 
[How to meet 3.1.4] 
3.1.5 When text requires reading ability more advanced than the lower secondary 
education level, supplemental content is available that does not require reading 
ability more advanced than the lower secondary education level. [How to meet 
3.1.5] 
3.1.6 A mechanism is available for identifying specific pronunciation of words 
where meaning cannot be determined without pronunciation. [How to meet 3.1.6] 
Guideline 3.1 (meaning) Issues 
Guideline 3.2 Make the placement and functionality of content predictable.
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 3.2
3.2.1 When any component receives focus, it does not cause a change of context. 
[How to meet 3.2.1] 
3.2.2 Changing the setting of any form control or field does not automatically 
cause a change of context (beyond moving to the next field in tab order), unless 
the authored unit contains instructions before the control that describe the 
behavior. [How to meet 3.2.2] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 3.2
3.2.3 Navigational mechanisms that are repeated on multiple Web units within a 
set of Web units or other primary resources occur in the same relative order 
each time they are repeated, unless a change is initiated by the user. [How to 
meet 3.2.3] 
3.2.4 Components that have the same functionality within a set of Web units are 
identified consistently. [How to meet 3.2.4] 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 3.2 
3.2.5 Changes of context are initiated only by user request. [How to meet 3.2.5] 

Guideline 3.2 (consistent-behavior) Issues 
Principle 4: Content should be robust enough to work with current and future 
user agents (including assistive technologies)
Guideline 4.1 Support compatibility with current and future user agents 
(including assistive technologies)
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 4.1
4.1.1 Web units or authored components can be parsed unambiguously, and the 
relationships in the resulting data structure are also unambiguous. [How to meet 
4.1.1] 
4.1.2 For all user interface components, the name and role can be 
programmatically determined, values that can be set by the user can be 
programmatically set, and notification of changes to these items is available to 
user agents, including assistive technologies. [How to meet 4.1.2] 
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 4.1
(No level 2 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 4.1 
(No level 3 success criteria for this guideline.) 
Guideline 4.1 (ensure-compat) Issues 
Guideline 4.2 Ensure that content is accessible or provide an accessible 
alternative
Level 1 Success Criteria for Guideline 4.2
4.2.1 At least one version of the content meets all level 1 success criteria, 
but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 1 success criteria may be 
available from the same URI. [How to meet 4.2.1] 
4.2.2 Content meets the following criteria even if the content uses a technology 
that is not in the chosen baseline: [How to meet 4.2.2] 
  If content can be entered using the keyboard, then the content can be exited 
  using the keyboard.
  Content conforms to success criterion 2.3.1 (general and red flash).
Level 2 Success Criteria for Guideline 4.2 
4.2.3 At least one version of the content meets all level 2 success criteria, 
but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 2 success criteria may be 
available from the same URI. [How to meet 4.2.3] 
Level 3 Success Criteria for Guideline 4.2 
4.2.4 Content implemented using technologies outside of the chosen baseline 
satisfies all Level 1 and Level 2 requirements supported by the technologies. 
[How to meet 4.2.4] 
Guideline 4.2 (accessible-alternatives) Issues 
Appendix A: Glossary (Normative)
This section is normative. 
  abbreviation 
  shortened form of a word, phrase, or name
  Note: Includes initialisms and acronyms.
  acronym 
  abbreviation made from the initial letters of a name or phrase that contains 
  several words
  Note: Many acronyms can be pronounced as words.
  Example: NOAA is an acronym made from the initial letters of the National 
  Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the United States.
  activity where timing is essential 
  activity where timing is part of the design of the activity and removal of the 
  time dependency would change the functionality of the content
  alternate version 
  version that provides all of the same information and functionality and is as 
  up to date as any non-conformant content
  analog, time-dependent input 
  input whose result is different depending on the rate of the analog movement 
  (such as when line width varies with pen speed or pressure.)
  Note: Most actions carried out by a pointing device can also be done from the 
  keyboard (for example, clicking, selecting, moving, sizing). However, there is 
  a small class of input that is done with a pointing device that cannot be done 
  from the keyboard in any known fashion. This type of input can be best 
  characterized by the fact that the outcome can only be achieved by moving the 
  pointer in a smooth fashion at a certain rate. For example, in a watercolor 
  program stroke width and opacity may depend on the rate of movement (and/or 
  pressure) of a "brush".
  Application Programming Interface (API) 
  definitions of how communication may take place between applications
  Note 1: Implementing APIs that are independent of a particular operating 
  environment (as are the W3C DOM Level 2 specifications) may reduce 
  implementation costs for multi-platform user agents and promote the 
  development of multi-platform assistive technologies. Implementing 
  conventional APIs for a particular operating environment may reduce 
  implementation costs for assistive technology developers who wish to 
  interoperate with more than one piece of software running on that operating 
  environment.
  Note 2: A "device API" defines how communication may take place with an input 
  or output device such as a keyboard, mouse, or video card.
  Note 3: In this document, an "input/output API" defines how applications or 
  devices communicate with a user agent. As used in this document, input and 
  output APIs include, but are not limited to, device APIs. Input and output 
  APIs also include more abstract communication interfaces than those specified 
  by device APIs. A "conventional input/output API" is one that is expected to 
  be implemented by software running on a particular operating environment. For 
  example, the conventional input APIs of the user agent are for the mouse and 
  keyboard. For touch screen devices or mobile devices, conventional input APIs 
  may include stylus, buttons, and voice. The graphical display and sound card 
  are considered conventional output devices for a graphical desktop computer 
  environment, and each has an associated API.
  Note 4: This definition is based on User Agent Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 
  Glossary.
  ASCII art 
  picture created by a spatial arrangement of characters (typically from the 95 
  printable characters defined by ASCII). 
  Assistive technology (in the context of this document) 
  a user agent that:
    relies on services (such as retrieving Web content and parsing markup) 
    provided by one or more other "host" user agents. Assistive technologies 
    communicate data and messages with host user agents by using and monitoring 
    APIs.
    provides services beyond those offered by the host user agents to meet the 
    requirements of users with disabilities. Additional services include 
    alternative renderings (e.g., as synthesized speech or magnified content), 
    alternative input methods (e.g., voice), additional navigation or 
    orientation mechanisms, and content transformations (e.g., to make tables 
    more accessible).
  Example: Examples of assistive technologies that are important in the context 
  of this document include the following:
    screen magnifiers, which are used by people with visual disabilities to 
    enlarge and change colors on the screen to improve the visual readability of 
    rendered text and images;
    screen readers, which are used by people who are blind or have reading 
    disabilities to read textual information through synthesized speech or 
    braille displays;
    voice recognition software, which may be used by people who have some 
    physical disabilities;
    alternative keyboards, which are used by people with certain physical 
    disabilities to simulate the keyboard;
    alternative pointing devices, which are used by people with certain physical 
    disabilities to simulate mouse pointing and button activations.
  Note: This definition is based on User Agent Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 
  Glossary.
  audio description 
  narration added to the soundtrack to describe important visual details that 
  cannot be understood from the main soundtrack alone 
  Note 1: Audio descriptions of video provide information about actions, 
  characters, scene changes, and on-screen text.
  Note 2: In standard audio description, narration is added during existing 
  pauses in dialogue. (See also Extended audio descriptions.)
  authored component 
  an authored unit intended to be used as a part of another authored unit
  authored unit 
  set of material created as a single body by an author
  Example 1: a collection consisting of markup, a style sheet, and an image or 
  audio clip.
  Example 2: a set of Web pages intended to be viewed only as a unit or in 
  sequence.
  Note: This definition is based on Glossary of Terms for Device Independence.
  baseline 
  set of technologies assumed to be supported by, and enabled in, user agents 
  Note: For more information on baselines and their use, refer to Technology 
  Assumptions and the "baseline." 
  blink 
  turn on and off between 0.5 and 3 times per second
  captions 
  text presented and synchronized with multimedia to provide not only the 
  speech, but also sound effects and sometimes speaker identification
  Note: In some countries, the term "subtitle" is used to refer to dialogue only 
  and "captions" is used as the term for dialogue plus sounds and speaker 
  identification. In other countries, subtitle (or its translation) is used to 
  refer to both. 
  changes of context 
  change of :
    user agent;
    viewport;
    focus;
    content that changes the meaning of the Web unit.
  Note: A change of content is not always a change of context. Small changes in 
  content, such as an expanding outline or dynamic menu, do not change the 
  context.
  content 
  information to be communicated to the user by means of a user agent 
  Note: This includes the code and markup that define the structure, 
  presentation, and interaction, as well as text, images, and sounds that convey 
  information to the end-user.
  context-sensitive help 
  help text that provides information related to the function currently being 
  performed
  emergency 
  a sudden, unexpected situation or occurrence that requires immediate action to 
  preserve health, safety, or property 
  event handler 
  section of code that responds to an action taken by the user (or user agent)
  Note: On Web pages, events are usually user actions such as moving the mouse, 
  typing, etc. 
    An event handler determines the response to that action. 
    A device-specific event handler only responds to an action by one kind of 
    input device. 
    An abstract event handler is one which can be activated by a variety of 
    input devices.
  extended audio descriptions 
  audio descriptions that are added to an audiovisual presentation by pausing 
  the video so that there is time to add additional description
  Note: This technique is only used when the sense of the video would be lost 
  without the additional audio description.
  full multimedia text alternative including any interaction 
  document including correctly sequenced descriptions of all visual settings, 
  actions, and non-speech sounds combined with descriptive transcripts of all 
  dialogue and a means of achieving any outcomes that are achieved using 
  interaction during the multimedia 
  Note: A screenplay used to create the multimedia content would meet this 
  definition only if it was corrected to accurately represent the final 
  multimedia after editing.
  functionality 
  processes and outcomes achievable through user action
  general flash threshold 
    A sequence of flashes or rapidly changing image sequences where all three of 
    the following occur:
      the combined area of flashes occurring concurrently (but not necessarily 
      contiguously) occupies more than one quarter of any 341 x 256 pixel 
      rectangle anywhere on the displayed screen area when the content is viewed 
      at 1024 x 768 pixels;
      there are more than three flashes within any one-second period; and
      the flashing is below 50 Hz.
  Note 1: For the general flash threshold, a flash is defined as a pair of 
  opposing changes in brightness of 10% or more of full scale white brightness, 
  where brightness is calculated as 0.2126 * ((R / FS) ^ 2.2) + 0.7152 * ((G / 
  FS) ^ 2.2) + 0.0722 * ((B / FS) ^ 2.2). R, G, and B are the red, green, and 
  blue RGB values of the color; FS is the maximum possible full scale RGB value 
  for R, G, and B (255 for eight bit color channels); and the "^" character is 
  the exponentiation operator. An "opposing change" is an increase followed by a 
  decrease, or a decrease followed by an increase. This applies only when the 
  brightness of the darker image is below .80 of full scale white brightness.
  Note 2: Based on Wisconsin Computer Equivalence Algorithm for Flash Pattern 
  Analysis (FPA) 
  idioms 
  phrase whose meaning cannot be deduced from the meaning of the individual 
  words and the specific words cannot be changed without losing the meaning
  Example 1: In English, "kicking the bucket" means "dying". But the phrase 
  cannot be changed to "kicking the buckets" or "kicking the tub" or "booting 
  the bucket" or "knocking over the bucket" without losing its meaning.
  Example 2: In English, "spilling the beans" means "revealing a secret." 
  However, "knocking over the beans" or "spilling the vegetables" does not mean 
  the same thing."
  Example 3: In Japanese, the phrase "さじを投げる（どうするこ ともできなくなり、あきらめること" literally 
  translates into "he threw a spoon". But it means that there was nothing he 
  could do and finally he gave up.
  Example 4: In Dutch, "Hij ging met de kippen op stok" literally translates 
  into "He went to roost with the chickens". But it means that he went to bed 
  early.
  information 
    a message to be sent and received
    a collection of facts or data from which inferences may be drawn
  information that is conveyed by color 
  information presented in a manner that depends entirely on the ability to 
  perceive color
  informative 
  for information purposes and not required for conformance
  Note: Content required for conformance is referred to as "normative."
  initialism 
  shortened form of a name or phrase made from the initial letters of words or 
  syllables contained in that name or phrase
  Note: Not defined in all languages. 
  Example 1: SNCF is a French initialism that contains the initial letters of 
  the Sociétè Nationale des Chemins de Fer, the French national railroad. 
  Example 2: ESP is an initialism for extrasensory perception.
  input error 
  information provided by the user that is not accepted
  Note: This includes:
    Information that is required by the Web unit but omitted by the user
    Information that is provided by the user but that falls outside the required 
    data format or values.
  jargon 
  words used in a particular way by people in a particular field
  Example: The word StickyKeys is jargon from the field of assistive 
  technology/accessibility.
  keyboard interface 
  interface used by software to obtain keystroke input
  Note 1: Allows users to provide keystroke input to programs even if the native 
  technology does not contain a keyboard.
  Example: A touch screen PDA has a keyboard interface built into its operating 
  system as well as a connector for external keyboards. Applications on the PDA 
  can use the interface to obtain keyboard input either from an external 
  keyboard or from other applications that provide simulated keyboard output, 
  such as handwriting interpreters or speech to text applications with "keyboard 
  emulation" functionality.
  Note 2: Operation of the application (or parts of the application) through a 
  keyboard operated mouse emulator, such as MouseKeys, does not qualify as 
  operation through a keyboard interface because operation of the program is 
  through its pointing device interface - not through its keyboard interface.
  label 
  text, image, or sound that is presented to a user to identify a component 
  within Web content 
  live audio-only 
  A time-based live presentation that contains only audio (no video and no 
  interaction).
  live video-only 
  A time-based live presentation that contains only video (no audio and no 
  interaction).
  Lower secondary education level 
  the two or three year period of education that begins after completion of six 
  years of school and ends nine years after the beginning of primary education.
  Note: This definition is based on [UNESCO].
  luminosity contrast ratio 
  (L1 + 0.05) / (L2 + 0.05), where L1 is the luminosity of the lighter of the 
  text or background colors, and L2 is the luminosity of the darker of the text 
  or background colors.
  Note 1: The luminosity of a color is defined as 0.2126 * ((R / FS) ^ 2.2) + 
  0.7152 * ((G / FS) ^ 2.2) + 0.0722 * ((B / FS) ^ 2.2). 
    R, G, and B are the red, green, and blue RGB values of the color.
    FS is the maximum possible full scale RGB value for R, G, and B (255 for 
    eight bit color channels).
    The "^" character is the exponentiation operator.
  Note 2: Luminosity values can range from 0 (black) to 1 (white), and 
  luminosity contrast ratios can range from 1 to 21.
  mechanism 
  process or technique for achieving a result
  multimedia 
  audio or video synchronized with another type of media and/or with time-based 
  interactive components
  name 
  text by which software can identify a component within Web content to the user
  Note: The name may be hidden and only exposed by assistive technology, whereas 
  a label is presented even without assistive technology. In many (but not all) 
  cases, the label is a display of the name.
  natural languages 
  languages used by humans to communicate, including spoken, written, and signed 
  languages
  Note: See also sign language interpretation.
  non-text content 
  content that is not represented by a Unicode character or sequence of Unicode 
  characters when rendered in a user agent according to the formal specification 
  of the content type 
  Note: This includes ASCII Art, which is a pattern of characters.
  normative 
  required for conformance
  Note 1: One may conform in a variety of well-defined ways to this document.
  Note 2: Content identified as "informative" or "non-normative" is never 
  required for conformance.
  parsed unambiguously 
  parsed into only one data structure
  Note: Parsing transforms markup or other code into a data structure, usually a 
  tree, which is suitable for later processing and which captures the implied 
  hierarchy of the input. 
  paused 
  stopped by user request and not restarted until requested by user
  presentation 
  rendering of the content and structure in a form that can be perceived by the 
  user
  primary education level 
  six year time period that begins between the ages of five and seven, possibly 
  without any previous education
  Note: This definition is based on [UNESCO].
  programmatically determined 
  determined by software from data provided in a user-agent-supported manner 
  such that the user agents can extract and present this information to users in 
  different modalities
  programmatically set 
  set by software using methods that are user-agent-supported 
  pure decoration 
  serving only an aesthetic purpose, providing no information, and having no 
  functionality.
  real-time event 
  event that a) occurs at the same time as the viewing, b) is not completely 
  generated by the content, and c) is not pre-recorded
  Example 1: A Webcast of a live performance.
  Example 2: An on-line auction with people bidding.
  Example 3: Live humans interacting in a fantasy world using avatars.
  red flash threshold 
    transition to or from a saturated red where all three of the following 
occur:
      The combined area of flashes occurring concurrently occupies more than one 
      quarter of any 341 x 256 pixel rectangle anywhere on the displayed screen 
      area when the content is viewed at 1024 x 768 pixels.
      There are more than three flashes within any one-second period.
      The flashing is below 50 Hz.
  Note: Based on Wisconsin Computer Equivalence Algorithm for Flash Pattern 
  Analysis (FPA) 
  regular expression 
  regular expression as defined in XML Schema Part 2: Datatypes, Appendix F.
  role 
  text or a number by which software can identify the function of a component 
  within Web content
  Example: A number that indicates whether an image functions as a hyperlink, 
  command button, or check box.
  same functionality 
  identical result when used
  Example: A submit "search" button on one Web page and a "find" button on 
  another Web page may both have a field to enter a term and list topics in the 
  web site related to the term submitted. In this case, they would have the same 
  functionality but would not be labeled consistently.
  same relative order 
  same position relative to other items
  Note: Items are considered to be in the same relative order even if other 
  items are inserted or removed from the original order. For example, expanding 
  navigation menus may insert an additional level of detail or a secondary 
  navigation section may be inserted into the reading order.
  sign language interpretation 
  translation of spoken words and other audible information into a language that 
  uses a simultaneous combination of handshapes, facial expressions, and 
  orientation and movement of the hands, arms, or body to convey meaning
  Note: Although some languages have a signed counterpart, most sign languages 
  are independent languages that are unrelated to the spoken language of the 
  same country or culture.
  specific sensory experience 
  a sensory experience that is not purely decorative and does not primarily 
  convey important information or perform a function
  structure 
    The way the parts of an authored unit are organized in relation to each 
    other; and
    The way a collection of Web units is organized
  supplemental content 
  additional content, which users may use in addition to or instead of the 
  default content, that illustrates or clarifies the default content
  Example: Examples of supplemental content may include text, images and audio.
  technology 
  markup language, programming language, style sheet, data format, or API 
  test or exercise that must use a particular sense 
  test where the content must be presented in a particular sensory format
  Example: Color blindness test, hearing test, vision exercise, spelling test.
  text 
  sequence of characters
  Note: Characters are those included in the Unicode/ISO/IEC 106464 repertoire. 
  text alternative 
  programmatically determined text that is used in place of non-text content, or 
  text that is used in addition to non-text content and referred to from the 
  programmatically determined text
  unicode 
  universal character set that defines all the characters needed for writing the 
  majority of living languages in use on computers
  Note 1: For more information, refer to the Unicode Consortium or to the 
  tutorial entitled, "Character sets & encodings in XHTML, HTML and CSS" 
  produced by the W3C Internationalization Activity. 
  Note 2: This definition is based on [UNICODE] 
  used in an unusual restricted way 
  words used in such a way that users must know exactly what definition to apply 
  in order to understand the content correctly
  Example: The word "representational" means something quite different if it 
  occurs in a discussion of visual art as opposed to a treatise on government, 
  but the appropriate definition can be determined from context. By contrast, 
  the word "text" is used in a very specific way in WCAG 2.0, so a definition is 
  supplied in the glossary.
  user agent 
  any software that retrieves and renders Web content for users
  Example: Web browsers, media players, plug-ins, and other programs — including 
  assistive technologies — that help in retrieving and rendering Web content.
  user-agent-supported 
  implemented by user agents and assistive technologies
  Note: One of the factors that should be considered before adding a technology 
  to a baseline is the availability of affordable user agents and assistive 
  technologies which support the technology.
  variations in presentations of text 
  changes in the visual appearance or sound of the text, such as changing to a 
  different font or a different voice
  video 
  the technology of moving pictures or images
  Note: Video can be made up of animated or photographic images, or both.
  Web unit 
  a collection of information, consisting of one or more resources, intended to 
  be rendered together, and identified by a single Uniform Resource Identifier 
  (such as URLs)
  Note: This definition is based on the definition of Web page in Web 
  Characterization Terminology & Definitions Sheet. The concept of simultaneity 
  was removed to allow the term to cover interactive and scripted content.
  Example 1: An interactive movie-like shopping environment where the user 
  navigates about and activates products to have them demonstrated, and moves 
  them to a cart to buy them.
  Example 2: A Web page including all embedded images and media.
  Wisconsin Computer Equivalence Algorithm for Flash Pattern Analysis (FPA) 
  a method developed at the University of Wisconsin, working in conjunction with 
  Dr. Graham Harding and Cambridge Research Associates, for applying the United 
  Kingdom's "Ofcom Guidance Note on Flashing Images and Regular Patterns in 
  Television (Re-issued as Ofcom Notes 25 July 2005)" to content displayed on a 
  computer screen, such as Web pages and other computer content
  Note: The Ofcom Guidance Document [OFCOM] is based on the assumption that the 
  television screen occupies the central ten degrees of vision. This is not 
  accurate for a screen which is located in front of a person. The Wisconsin 
  algorithm basically carries out the same analysis as the Ofcom Guidelines 
  except that is does it on every possible ten degree window for a prototypical 
  computer display.
Appendix B: Checklist (Non-Normative)
This section is informative.
The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 Checklist serves as an appendix to 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 [WCAG20]. It lists all of the success 
criteria from WCAG 2.0 in a checkable list. The level of each success criterion 
is provided as well as a link to WCAG 2.0 for more information for each success 
criterion. For many readers, the Checklist provides a quick reference and 
overview to the information in WCAG 2.0.
Success Criteria
  Guideline 1.1 : Provide text alternatives for all non-text 
      contentTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  1.1.1 For all non-text content, one of the following is true: [How to 
      meet 1.1.1] 
        If non-text content presents information or responds to user input, text 
        alternatives serve the same purpose and present the same information as 
        the non-text content. If text alternatives cannot serve the same 
        purpose, then text alternatives at least identify the purpose of the 
        non-text content.
        If non-text content is multimedia; live audio-only or live video-only 
        content; a test or exercise that must use a particular sense; or 
        primarily intended to create a specific sensory experience; then text 
        alternatives at least identify the non-text content with a descriptive 
        text label. (For multimedia, see also Guideline 1.2 Provide synchronized 
        alternatives for multimedia .)
        If the purpose of non-text content is to confirm that content is being 
        operated by a person rather than a computer, different forms are 
        provided to accommodate multiple disabilities.
        If non-text content is pure decoration, or used only for visual 
        formatting, or if it is not presented to users, it is implemented such 
        that it can be ignored by assistive technology.  
  Guideline 1.2 : Provide synchronized alternatives for 
      multimediaTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  1.2.1 Captions are provided for prerecorded multimedia. [How to meet 
      1.2.1]   
       1.2.2 Audio descriptions of video, or a full multimedia text alternative 
      including any interaction, are provided for prerecorded multimedia. [How 
      to meet 1.2.2]   
      L2  1.2.3 Audio descriptions of video are provided for prerecorded 
      multimedia. [How to meet 1.2.3]   
       1.2.4 Captions are provided for live multimedia. [How to meet 1.2.4]   
      L3  1.2.5 Sign language interpretation is provided for multimedia. [How to 
      meet 1.2.5]   
       1.2.6 Extended audio descriptions of video are provided for prerecorded 
      multimedia. [How to meet 1.2.6]   
       1.2.7 For prerecorded multimedia, a full multimedia text alternative 
      including any interaction is provided. [How to meet 1.2.7]   
  Guideline 1.3 : Ensure that information and structure can be separated from 
  presentationTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  1.3.1 Information and relationships conveyed through presentation can 
      be programmatically determined, and notification of changes to these is 
      available to user agents, including assistive technologies. [How to meet 
      1.3.1]   
       1.3.2 Any information that is conveyed by color is also visually evident 
      without color. [How to meet 1.3.2]   
       1.3.3 When the sequence of the content affects its meaning, that sequence 
      can be programmatically determined. [How to meet 1.3.3]   
      L2  1.3.4 Information that is conveyed by variations in presentation of 
      text is also conveyed in text, or the variations in presentation of text 
      can be programmatically determined. [How to meet 1.3.4]   
       1.3.5 Information required to understand and operate content does not 
      rely on shape, size, visual location, or orientation of components. [How 
      to meet 1.3.5]   
  Guideline 1.4 : Make it easy to distinguish foreground information from its 
  background TrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L2  1.4.1 Text or diagrams, and their background, have a luminosity 
      contrast ratio of at least 5:1. [How to meet 1.4.1]   
       1.4.2 A mechanism is available to turn off background audio that plays 
      automatically, without requiring the user to turn off all audio. [How to 
      meet 1.4.2]   
      L3  1.4.3 Text or diagrams, and their background, have a luminosity 
      contrast ratio of at least 10:1. [How to meet 1.4.3]   
       1.4.4 Audio content does not contain background sounds, background sounds 
      can be turned off, or background sounds are at least 20 decibels lower 
      than the foreground audio content, with the exception of occasional sound 
      effects. [How to meet 1.4.4] 
      Note: A 20 decibel difference in sound level is roughly four times (4x) 
      quieter or louder. Background sound that meets this requirement will be 
      approximately four times (4x) quieter than the foreground audio content.  
  Guideline 2.1 : Make all functionality operable via a keyboard 
      interfaceTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  2.1.1 All functionality of the content is operable in a 
      non-time-dependent manner through a keyboard interface, except where the 
      task requires analog, time-dependent input. [How to meet 2.1.1] 
      Note: This does not preclude and should not discourage the support of 
      other input methods (such as a mouse) in addition to keyboard operation.  
      L3  2.1.2 All functionality of the content is operable in a 
      non-time-dependent manner through a keyboard interface. [How to meet 
      2.1.2]   
  Guideline 2.2 : Allow users to control time limits on their reading or 
  interactionTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  2.2.1 For each time-out that is a function of the content, at least 
      one of the following is true: [How to meet 2.2.1] 
        the user is allowed to deactivate the time-out; or
        the user is allowed to adjust the time-out over a wide range that is at 
        least ten times the length of the default setting; or
        the user is warned before time expires and given at least 20 seconds to 
        extend the time-out with a simple action (for example, "hit any key"), 
        and the user is allowed to extend the timeout at least ten times; or
        the time-out is an important part of a real-time event (for example, an 
        auction), and no alternative to the time-out is possible; or
        the time-out is part of an activity where timing is essential (for 
        example, competitive gaming or time-based testing) and time limits can 
        not be extended further without invalidating the activity.  
      L2  2.2.2 Content does not blink for more than three seconds, or a method 
      is available to stop all blinking content in the Web unit or authored 
      component. [How to meet 2.2.2] 
      Note: For requirements related to flickering or flashing content, refer to 
      Guideline 2.3 Allow users to avoid content that could cause seizures due 
      to photosensitivity .  
       2.2.3 Content can be paused by the user unless the timing or movement is 
      part of an activity where timing or movement is essential. [How to meet 
      2.2.3]   
      L3  2.2.4 Except for real-time events, timing is not an essential part of 
      the event or activity presented by the content. [How to meet 2.2.4]   
       2.2.5 Interruptions, such as updated content, can be postponed or 
      suppressed by the user, except interruptions involving an emergency. [How 
      to meet 2.2.5]   
       2.2.6 When an authenticated session expires, the user can continue the 
      activity without loss of data after re-authenticating. [How to meet 2.2.6] 
        
  Guideline 2.3 : Allow users to avoid content that could cause seizures due to 
  photosensitivityTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  2.3.1 Content does not violate the general flash threshold or the red 
      flash threshold. [How to meet 2.3.1]   
      L3  2.3.2 Web units do not contain any components that flash more than 
      three times in any 1-second period. [How to meet 2.3.2]   
  Guideline 2.4 : Provide mechanisms to help users find content, orient 
  themselves within it, and navigate through itTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  2.4.1 A mechanism is available to bypass blocks of content that are 
      repeated on multiple Web units. [How to meet 2.4.1]   
      L2  2.4.2 More than one way is available to locate content within a set of 
      Web units where content is not the result of, or a step in, a process or 
      task. [How to meet 2.4.2]   
       2.4.3 Web units have titles. [How to meet 2.4.3]   
       2.4.4 Each link is programmatically associated with text from which its 
      purpose can be determined. [How to meet 2.4.4]   
      L3  2.4.5 Titles, headings, and labels are descriptive. [How to meet 
      2.4.5]   
       2.4.6 When a Web unit or authored component is navigated sequentially, 
      components receive focus in an order that follows relationships and 
      sequences in the content. [How to meet 2.4.6]   
       2.4.7 Information about the user's location within a set of Web units is 
      available. [How to meet 2.4.7]   
       2.4.8 The purpose of each link can be programmatically determined from 
      the link. [How to meet 2.4.8]   
  Guideline 2.5 : Help users avoid mistakes and make it easy to correct mistakes 
  that do occurTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  2.5.1 If an input error is detected, the error is identified and 
      described to the user in text. [How to meet 2.5.1]   
      L2  2.5.2 If an input error is detected and suggestions for correction are 
      known and can be provided without jeopardizing the security or purpose of 
      the content, the suggestions are provided to the user. [How to meet 2.5.2] 
        
       2.5.3 For forms that cause legal or financial transactions to occur, that 
      modify or delete data in data storage systems, or that submit test 
      responses, at least one of the following is true: [How to meet 2.5.3] 
        Actions are reversible.
        Actions are checked for input errors before going on to the next step in 
        the process.
        The user is able to review and confirm or correct information before 
        submitting it.  
      L3  2.5.4 Context-sensitive help is available for text input. [How to meet 
      2.5.4]   
  Guideline 3.1 : Make text content readable and understandable.TrueSuccess 
      CriterionComments
      L1  3.1.1 The primary natural language or languages of the Web unit can be 
      programmatically determined. [How to meet 3.1.1]   
      L2  3.1.2 The natural language of each passage or phrase in the Web unit 
      can be programmatically determined. [How to meet 3.1.2] 
      Note: This requirement does not apply to individual words or phrases that 
      have become part of the primary language of the content.  
      L3  3.1.3 A mechanism is available for identifying specific definitions of 
      words or phrases used in an unusual or restricted way, including idioms 
      and jargon. [How to meet 3.1.3]   
       3.1.4 A mechanism for finding the expanded form of abbreviations is 
      available. [How to meet 3.1.4]   
       3.1.5 When text requires reading ability more advanced than the lower 
      secondary education level, supplemental content is available that does not 
      require reading ability more advanced than the lower secondary education 
      level. [How to meet 3.1.5]   
       3.1.6 A mechanism is available for identifying specific pronunciation of 
      words where meaning cannot be determined without pronunciation. [How to 
      meet 3.1.6]   
  Guideline 3.2 : Make the placement and functionality of content 
      predictable.TrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  3.2.1 When any component receives focus, it does not cause a change of 
      context. [How to meet 3.2.1]   
       3.2.2 Changing the setting of any form control or field does not 
      automatically cause a change of context (beyond moving to the next field 
      in tab order), unless the authored unit contains instructions before the 
      control that describe the behavior. [How to meet 3.2.2]   
      L2  3.2.3 Navigational mechanisms that are repeated on multiple Web units 
      within a set of Web units or other primary resources occur in the same 
      relative order each time they are repeated, unless a change is initiated 
      by the user. [How to meet 3.2.3]   
       3.2.4 Components that have the same functionality within a set of Web 
      units are identified consistently. [How to meet 3.2.4]   
      L3  3.2.5 Changes of context are initiated only by user request. [How to 
      meet 3.2.5]   
  Guideline 4.1 : Support compatibility with current and future user agents 
  (including assistive technologies)TrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  4.1.1 Web units or authored components can be parsed unambiguously, 
      and the relationships in the resulting data structure are also 
      unambiguous. [How to meet 4.1.1]   
       4.1.2 For all user interface components, the name and role can be 
      programmatically determined, values that can be set by the user can be 
      programmatically set, and notification of changes to these items is 
      available to user agents, including assistive technologies. [How to meet 
      4.1.2]   
  Guideline 4.2 : Ensure that content is accessible or provide an accessible 
  alternativeTrueSuccess CriterionComments
      L1  4.2.1 At least one version of the content meets all level 1 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 1 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. [How to meet 4.2.1]   
       4.2.2 Content meets the following criteria even if the content uses a 
      technology that is not in the chosen baseline: [How to meet 4.2.2] 
        If content can be entered using the keyboard, then the content can be 
        exited using the keyboard.
        Content conforms to success criterion 2.3.1 (general and red flash).  
      L2  4.2.3 At least one version of the content meets all level 2 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 2 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. [How to meet 4.2.3]   
      L3  4.2.4 Content implemented using technologies outside of the chosen 
      baseline satisfies all Level 1 and Level 2 requirements supported by the 
      technologies. [How to meet 4.2.4]   

Appendix C: Acknowledgements (Non-Normative)
This section is informative.
This publication has been funded in part with Federal funds from the U.S. 
Department of Education under contract number ED05CO0039. The content of this 
publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the U.S. 
Department of Education, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, 
or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. 
C.1 Participants active in the WCAG WG at the time of publication
  Bruce Bailey (DoED/OCIO)
  Frederick Boland (NIST)
  Judy Brewer (W3C/MIT)
  Ben Caldwell (Trace R&D Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison)
  Sofia Celic (The National Information and Library Service)
  Wendy Chisholm (W3C)
  Michael Cooper (Watchfire)
  Roberto Ellero (International Webmasters Association / HTML Writers Guild)
  Bengt Farre (Femtio Procent Data)
  Becky Gibson (IBM)
  Kerstin Goldsmith (Oracle)
  Loretta Guarino Reid (Adobe)
  Katie Haritos-Shea
  Gez Lemon (International Webmasters Association / HTML Writers Guild)
  Alex Li (SAP AG)
  Yvette Hoitink (Heritas)
  Luca Mascaro (International Webmasters Association / HTML Writers Guild)
  Sorcha Moore (Segala)
  David MacDonald (E-Ramp Inc.)
  Roberto Scano (International Webmasters Association / HTML Writers Guild)
  Cynthia Shelley (Microsoft)
  John Slatin (Accessibility Institute, University of Texas at Austin)
  Andi Snow-Weaver (IBM)
  Christophe Strobbe (DoArch, K.U.Leuven)
  Makoto Ueki (Infoaxia)
  Gregg Vanderheiden (Trace R&D Center, University of Wisconsin)
C.2 Other previously active WCAG WG participants and other contributors to WCAG 
2.0
Jenae Andershonis, Avi Arditti, Sandy Bartell, Kynn Bartlett, Marco Bertoni, 
Harvey Bingham, Paul Bohman, Dick Brown, Doyle Burnett, Roberto Castaldo, 
Jonathan Chetwynd, David M Clark, Joe Clark, Tom Croucher, Nir Dagan, Daniel 
Dardailler, Geoff Deering, Don Evans, Alan J. Flavell, Al Gilman, Jon Gunderson, 
Emmanuelle Gutiérrez y Restrepo, Donovan Hipke, Bjoern Hoehrmann, Ian Jacobs, 
Phill Jenkins, Leonard R. Kasday, Andrew Kirkpatrick, Marja-Riitta Koivunen, 
Scott Luebking, Tim Lacy, Jim Ley, William Loughborough, Greg Lowney ,Mathew J 
Mirabella, Charles McCathieNevile , Matt May, Marti McCuller, Charles F. Munat, 
Robert Neff, Bruno von Niman, Tim Noonan, Sebastiano Nutarelli, Graham Oliver, 
Sean B. Palmer, Sailesh Panchang, Anne Pemberton, David Poehlman, Adam Victor 
Reed, Chris Ridpath, Lee Roberts, Gregory J. Rosmaita, Lisa Seeman, Justin 
Thorp, Gian Sampson-Wild, Joel Sanda, Jim Thatcher, Takayuki Watanabe, Jason 
White.
Appendix D: Comparison of WCAG 1.0 checkpoints to WCAG 2.0 (Non-Normative)
This section is informative.
Priority 1 checkpoints
This mapping shows how the WCAG 1.0 checkpoints relate to the WCAG 2.0 Last Call 
Working Draft released 27 April 2006. Note that WCAG 2.0 is still a draft and 
the WCAG 2.0 Guidelines and success criteria in no way supersede the checkpoints 
in WCAG 1.0.
The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines Working Group is working carefully to 
enable organizations and individuals that are currently using WCAG 1.0 (which 
remains a stable and referenceable document) to ensure that they will be able to 
make a smooth transition to WCAG 2.0 when it is released.
      In General (Priority 1)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      1.1: Provide a text equivalent for every non-text element (e.g., via 
      "alt", "longdesc", or in element content). This includes: images, 
      graphical representations of text (including symbols), image map regions, 
      animations (e.g., animated GIFs), applets and programmatic objects, ascii 
      art, frames, scripts, images used as list bullets, spacers, graphical 
      buttons, sounds (played with or without user interaction), stand-alone 
      audio files, audio tracks of video, and video. 1.1.1 For all non-text 
      content, one of the following is true: (Level 1) 
        If non-text content presents information or responds to user input, text 
        alternatives serve the same purpose and present the same information as 
        the non-text content. If text alternatives cannot serve the same 
        purpose, then text alternatives at least identify the purpose of the 
        non-text content.
        If non-text content is multimedia; live audio-only or live video-only 
        content; a test or exercise that must use a particular sense; or 
        primarily intended to create a specific sensory experience; then text 
        alternatives at least identify the non-text content with a descriptive 
        text label. (For multimedia, see also Guideline 1.2 Provide synchronized 
        alternatives for multimedia .)
        If the purpose of non-text content is to confirm that content is being 
        operated by a person rather than a computer, different forms are 
        provided to accommodate multiple disabilities.
        If non-text content is pure decoration, or used only for visual 
        formatting, or if it is not presented to users, it is implemented such 
        that it can be ignored by assistive technology.
      For scripts, applets, and objects, alternative versions are covered under 
      Guideline 4.2, and labels under Guideline 1.1 (See also SC 2.4.6 (Level 3) 
      and SC 4.1.2 (Level 1).).
      Images used as bullets are also covered in Guideline 1.3 with regard to 
      CSS usage. For framesets, noframes is no longer required. For multimedia, 
      alternatives (beyond labels) are covered under Guideline 1.2. ASCII art is 
      non-text content.
      2.1: Ensure that all information conveyed with color is also available 
      without color, for example from context or markup.1.3.2 Any information 
      that is conveyed by color is also visually evident without color. (Level 
      1) 
      4.1: Clearly identify changes in the natural language of a document's text 
      and any text equivalents (e.g., captions).3.1.2 The natural language of 
      each passage or phrase in the Web unit can be programmatically determined. 
      (Level 2) 
      Note: This requirement does not apply to individual words or phrases that 
      have become part of the primary language of the content.
      Note: Identification of the language for individual words is no longer 
      required. 
      6.1: Organize documents so they may be read without style sheets. For 
      example, when an HTML document is rendered without associated style 
      sheets, it must still be possible to read the document. This is 
      baseline-dependent:
        if style sheets are in your baseline, WCAG 1.0 checkpoint 6.1 is not 
        required; 
        if style sheets are not in your baseline, then WCAG 1.0 checkpoint 6.1 
        is required at Level 1 (as it maps to Guideline 1.3 L1) 

      6.2: Ensure that equivalents for dynamic content are updated when the 
      dynamic content changes. Text alternatives are addressed in Guideline 1.1, 
      1.2, and 4.2. If providing a text alternative for content and that content 
      changes, then the text alternative must also be changed or else you don't 
      conform to Guideline 1.1, 1.2, and 4.2 anymore. 
      7.1: Until user agents allow users to control flickering, avoid causing 
      the screen to flicker. 2.3.1 Content does not violate the general flash 
      threshold or the red flash threshold. (Level 1) 
      2.3.2 Web units do not contain any components that flash more than three 
      times in any 1-second period. (Level 3) 
      14.1: Use the clearest and simplest language appropriate for a site's 
      content. Some of the Level 3 success criteria in Guideline 3.1 aid in 
      making content understandable. There is no direct mapping. 
      And if you use images and image maps (Priority 1)WCAG 2.0 Success Critera
      1.2: Provide redundant text links for each active region of a server-side 
      image map. With regard to text alternatives:
      1.1.1 For all non-text content, one of the following is true: (Level 1) 
        If non-text content presents information or responds to user input, text 
        alternatives serve the same purpose and present the same information as 
        the non-text content. If text alternatives cannot serve the same 
        purpose, then text alternatives at least identify the purpose of the 
        non-text content.
        If non-text content is multimedia; live audio-only or live video-only 
        content; a test or exercise that must use a particular sense; or 
        primarily intended to create a specific sensory experience; then text 
        alternatives at least identify the non-text content with a descriptive 
        text label. (For multimedia, see also Guideline 1.2 Provide synchronized 
        alternatives for multimedia .)
        If the purpose of non-text content is to confirm that content is being 
        operated by a person rather than a computer, different forms are 
        provided to accommodate multiple disabilities.
        If non-text content is pure decoration, or used only for visual 
        formatting, or if it is not presented to users, it is implemented such 
        that it can be ignored by assistive technology.
      With regard to keyboard access: 
      2.1.1 All functionality of the content is operable in a non-time-dependent 
      manner through a keyboard interface, except where the task requires 
      analog, time-dependent input. (Level 1) 
      Note: This does not preclude and should not discourage the support of 
      other input methods (such as a mouse) in addition to keyboard operation.
      2.4.4 Each link is programmatically associated with text from which its 
      purpose can be determined. (Level 2) 
      4.2.1 At least one version of the content meets all level 1 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 1 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. (Level 1) 
      Note: Server-side image maps are not keyboard accessible. 
      9.1: Provide client-side image maps instead of server-side image maps 
      except where the regions cannot be defined with an available geometric 
      shape.With regard to text alternatives:
      1.1.1 For all non-text content, one of the following is true: (Level 1) 
        If non-text content presents information or responds to user input, text 
        alternatives serve the same purpose and present the same information as 
        the non-text content. If text alternatives cannot serve the same 
        purpose, then text alternatives at least identify the purpose of the 
        non-text content.
        If non-text content is multimedia; live audio-only or live video-only 
        content; a test or exercise that must use a particular sense; or 
        primarily intended to create a specific sensory experience; then text 
        alternatives at least identify the non-text content with a descriptive 
        text label. (For multimedia, see also Guideline 1.2 Provide synchronized 
        alternatives for multimedia .)
        If the purpose of non-text content is to confirm that content is being 
        operated by a person rather than a computer, different forms are 
        provided to accommodate multiple disabilities.
        If non-text content is pure decoration, or used only for visual 
        formatting, or if it is not presented to users, it is implemented such 
        that it can be ignored by assistive technology.
      With regard to keyboard access: 
      2.1.1 All functionality of the content is operable in a non-time-dependent 
      manner through a keyboard interface, except where the task requires 
      analog, time-dependent input. (Level 1) 
      Note: This does not preclude and should not discourage the support of 
      other input methods (such as a mouse) in addition to keyboard operation.
      2.4.4 Each link is programmatically associated with text from which its 
      purpose can be determined. (Level 2) 
      4.2.1 At least one version of the content meets all level 1 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 1 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. (Level 1) 
      Note: Server-side image maps are not keyboard accessible. 
      And if you use tables (Priority 1)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      5.1: For data tables, identify row and column headers. 1.3.1 Information 
      and relationships conveyed through presentation can be programmatically 
      determined, and notification of changes to these is available to user 
      agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      5.2: For data tables that have two or more logical levels of row or column 
      headers, use markup to associate data cells and header cells. 1.3.1 
      Information and relationships conveyed through presentation can be 
      programmatically determined, and notification of changes to these is 
      available to user agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      And if you use frames (Priority 1)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      12.1: Title each frame to facilitate frame identification and navigation. 
      2.4.1 A mechanism is available to bypass blocks of content that are 
      repeated on multiple Web units. (Level 1) 
      2.4.4 Each link is programmatically associated with text from which its 
      purpose can be determined. (Level 2) 
      4.1.2 For all user interface components, the name and role can be 
      programmatically determined, values that can be set by the user can be 
      programmatically set, and notification of changes to these items is 
      available to user agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      And if you use applets and scripts (Priority 1)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      6.3: Ensure that pages are usable when scripts, applets, or other 
      programmatic objects are turned off or not supported. If this is not 
      possible, provide equivalent information on an alternative accessible 
      page. For any technologies (scripts, applets, or other programmatic 
      objects) not in the specified baseline, the following are true: 
        The Web content still conforms using user agents that only support the 
        technologies that are in the baseline (i.e. the use of technologies that 
        are not in the baseline does not "break" access to the Web content by 
        user agents that don't support those technologies.) 
        All content and functionality are available using only the technologies 
        in the specified baseline. 
      4.2.1 At least one version of the content meets all level 1 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 1 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. (Level 1) 
      4.2.3 At least one version of the content meets all level 2 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 2 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. (Level 2) 
      And if you use multimedia (Priority 1)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      1.3: Until user agents can automatically read aloud the text equivalent of 
      a visual track, provide an auditory description of the important 
      information of the visual track of a multimedia presentation. 1.2.2 Audio 
      descriptions of video, or a full multimedia text alternative including any 
      interaction, are provided for prerecorded multimedia. (Level 1) 
      1.4: For any time-based multimedia presentation (e.g., a movie or 
      animation), synchronize equivalent alternatives (e.g., captions or 
      auditory descriptions of the visual track) with the presentation. 1.2.1 
      Captions are provided for prerecorded multimedia. (Level 1) 
      1.2.2 Audio descriptions of video, or a full multimedia text alternative 
      including any interaction, are provided for prerecorded multimedia. (Level 
      1) 
      1.2.3 Audio descriptions of video are provided for prerecorded multimedia. 
      (Level 2) 
      1.2.4 Captions are provided for live multimedia. (Level 2) 
      1.2.6 Extended audio descriptions of video are provided for prerecorded 
      multimedia. (Level 3) 
      And if all else fails (Priority 1)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      11.4: If, after best efforts, you cannot create an accessible page, 
      provide a link to an alternative page that uses W3C technologies, is 
      accessible, has equivalent information (or functionality), and is updated 
      as often as the inaccessible (original) page. 4.2.1 At least one version 
      of the content meets all level 1 success criteria, but alternate 
      version(s) that do not meet all level 1 success criteria may be available 
      from the same URI. (Level 1) 
      4.2.2 Content meets the following criteria even if the content uses a 
      technology that is not in the chosen baseline: (Level 1) 
        If content can be entered using the keyboard, then the content can be 
        exited using the keyboard.
        Content conforms to success criterion 2.3.1 (general and red flash).

Priority 2 checkpoints
      In General (Priority 2)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      2.2: Ensure that foreground and background color combinations provide 
      sufficient contrast when viewed by someone having color deficits or when 
      viewed on a black and white screen. [Priority 2 for images, Priority 3 for 
      text]. 1.4.1 Text or diagrams, and their background, have a luminosity 
      contrast ratio of at least 5:1. (Level 2) 
      1.4.3 Text or diagrams, and their background, have a luminosity contrast 
      ratio of at least 10:1. (Level 3) 
      3.1: When an appropriate markup language exists, use markup rather than 
      images to convey information. This is baseline-dependent. The guidance on 
      choosing an appropriate baseline will include information about the 
      advantages of technologies with accessibility features. 
      This also maps to sufficient techniques on using semantic markup listed in 
      How to Meet Success Criterion 1.3.1 (level 1) and How to Meet Success 
      Criterion 1.3.4 (level 2). 
      3.2: Create documents that validate to published formal grammars. 4.1.1 
      Web units or authored components can be parsed unambiguously, and the 
      relationships in the resulting data structure are also unambiguous. (Level 
      1) 
      Note: Validating to published formal grammars is a stronger requirement 
      than unambiguous parsing required by Success Criterion 4.1.1 but is one of 
      the sufficient techniques for this success criterion. Refer to How to Meet 
      Success Criterion 4.1.1 
      3.3: Use style sheets to control layout and presentation. 1.3.3 When the 
      sequence of the content affects its meaning, that sequence can be 
      programmatically determined. (Level 1) 
      Maps to several items in Understanding WCAG 2.0: CSS techniques for SC 
      1.3.1 (level 1), CSS techniques for SC 1.3.2 (level 1), and a client-side 
      scripting technique for SC 1.3.3 (level 1). 
      3.4: Use relative rather than absolute units in markup language attribute 
      values and style sheet property values. This maps to an advisory technique 
      (Using readable fonts) for Guideline 1.4. 
      3.5 Use header elements to convey document structure and use them 
      according to specification. 1.3.1 Information and relationships conveyed 
      through presentation can be programmatically determined, and notification 
      of changes to these is available to user agents, including assistive 
      technologies. (Level 1) 
      3.6: Mark up lists and list items properly. 1.3.1 Information and 
      relationships conveyed through presentation can be programmatically 
      determined, and notification of changes to these is available to user 
      agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      3.7: Mark up quotations. Do not use quotation markup for formatting 
      effects such as indentation. 1.3.1 Information and relationships conveyed 
      through presentation can be programmatically determined, and notification 
      of changes to these is available to user agents, including assistive 
      technologies. (Level 1) 
      1.3.4 Information that is conveyed by variations in presentation of text 
      is also conveyed in text, or the variations in presentation of text can be 
      programmatically determined. (Level 2) 
      6.5: Ensure that dynamic content is accessible or provide an alternative 
      presentation or page. 4.2.1 At least one version of the content meets all 
      level 1 success criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all 
      level 1 success criteria may be available from the same URI. (Level 1) 
      4.2.3 At least one version of the content meets all level 2 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 2 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. (Level 2) 
      7.2: Until user agents allow users to control blinking, avoid causing 
      content to blink (i.e., change presentation at a regular rate, such as 
      turning on and off). 2.2.2 Content does not blink for more than three 
      seconds, or a method is available to stop all blinking content in the Web 
      unit or authored component. (Level 2) 
      Note: For requirements related to flickering or flashing content, refer to 
      Guideline 2.3 Allow users to avoid content that could cause seizures due 
      to photosensitivity .
      7.4: Until user agents provide the ability to stop the refresh, do not 
      create periodically auto-refreshing pages. 2.2.1 For each time-out that is 
      a function of the content, at least one of the following is true: (Level 
      1) 
        the user is allowed to deactivate the time-out; or
        the user is allowed to adjust the time-out over a wide range that is at 
        least ten times the length of the default setting; or
        the user is warned before time expires and given at least 20 seconds to 
        extend the time-out with a simple action (for example, "hit any key"), 
        and the user is allowed to extend the timeout at least ten times; or
        the time-out is an important part of a real-time event (for example, an 
        auction), and no alternative to the time-out is possible; or
        the time-out is part of an activity where timing is essential (for 
        example, competitive gaming or time-based testing) and time limits can 
        not be extended further without invalidating the activity.
      3.2.5 Changes of context are initiated only by user request. (Level 3) 
      7.5: Until user agents provide the ability to stop auto-redirect, do not 
      use markup to redirect pages automatically. Instead, configure the server 
      to perform redirects. 3.2.5 Changes of context are initiated only by user 
      request. (Level 3) 
      10.1: Until user agents allow users to turn off spawned windows, do not 
      cause pop-ups or other windows to appear and do not change the current 
      window without informing the user. 3.2.1 When any component receives 
      focus, it does not cause a change of context. (Level 1) 
      3.2.2 Changing the setting of any form control or field does not 
      automatically cause a change of context (beyond moving to the next field 
      in tab order), unless the authored unit contains instructions before the 
      control that describe the behavior. (Level 1) 
      3.2.5 Changes of context are initiated only by user request. (Level 3) 
      11.1: Use W3C technologies when they are available and appropriate for a 
      task and use the latest versions when supported. No longer required for 
      conformance to WCAG 2.0.
      Note: The document About Baselines and WCAG 2.0 provides advice about 
      choosing appropriate technologies as related to setting baselines.
      11.2: Avoid deprecated features of W3C technologies. No longer required 
      for conformance to WCAG 2.0.
      12.3: Divide large blocks of information into more manageable groups where 
      natural and appropriate. No longer required for conformance to WCAG 2.0.
      This partially maps to a sufficient technique for SC 2.4.1 (level 1): 
      Providing Heading elements at the beginning of each section of content. 
      13.1: Clearly identify the target of each link. 2.4.4 Each link is 
      programmatically associated with text from which its purpose can be 
      determined. (Level 2) 
      2.4.8 The purpose of each link can be programmatically determined from the 
      link. (Level 3) 
      13.2: Provide metadata to add semantic information to pages and sites. 
      This is no longer required for conformance, but could be a technique for 
      satisfying certain success criteria in Guidelines 2.4, 4.2, 3.1 and 1.3. 
      This is also baseline-dependent. 
      13.3: Provide information about the general layout of a site (e.g., a site 
      map or table of contents). 2.4.2 More than one way is available to locate 
      content within a set of Web units where content is not the result of, or a 
      step in, a process or task. (Level 2) 
      This also maps to the technique Providing a Site Map.
      Note: This is a partial mapping.
      13.4: Use navigation mechanisms in a consistent manner. 3.2.3 Navigational 
      mechanisms that are repeated on multiple Web units within a set of Web 
      units or other primary resources occur in the same relative order each 
      time they are repeated, unless a change is initiated by the user. (Level 
      2) 
      3.2.4 Components that have the same functionality within a set of Web 
      units are identified consistently. (Level 2) 
      And if you use tables (Priority 2)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      5.3: Do not use tables for layout unless the table makes sense when 
      linearized. Otherwise, if the table does not make sense, provide an 
      alternative equivalent (which may be a linearized version). 1.3.3 When the 
      sequence of the content affects its meaning, that sequence can be 
      programmatically determined. (Level 1) 
      5.4: If a table is used for layout, do not use any structural markup for 
      the purpose of visual formatting. 1.3.1 Information and relationships 
      conveyed through presentation can be programmatically determined, and 
      notification of changes to these is available to user agents, including 
      assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      Especially: Failure of SC 1.3.1 due to using structural markup in a way 
      that does not represent relationships in the content.
      And if you use frames (Priority 2)WCAG 2.0 Succes Criteria
      12.2: Describe the purpose of frames and how frames relate to each other 
      if it is not obvious by frame titles alone. This is no longer required for 
      conformance (because the longdesc attribute type on the frame element type 
      has not been supported and is not defined in XHTML 1.1, the Working Draft 
      of XFrames, or the Working Draft of XHTML 2.0). The longdesc attribute is 
      still present in the Frames Module defined in XHTML Modularization. 
      And if you use forms (Priority 2)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      10.2: Until user agents support explicit associations between labels and 
      form controls, for all form controls with implicitly associated labels, 
      ensure that the label is properly positioned. User agents now support 
      explicit associations of labels with form controls, so the "until user 
      agents" clause has been satisfied. This is therefore no longer a 
      requirement under WCAG 2.0.
      It is an Advisory item. Other closely related SC are:
      1.3.1 Information and relationships conveyed through presentation can be 
      programmatically determined, and notification of changes to these is 
      available to user agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      1.3.4 Information that is conveyed by variations in presentation of text 
      is also conveyed in text, or the variations in presentation of text can be 
      programmatically determined. (Level 2) 
      12.4: Associate labels explicitly with their controls. 1.3.1 Information 
      and relationships conveyed through presentation can be programmatically 
      determined, and notification of changes to these is available to user 
      agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      4.1.2 For all user interface components, the name and role can be 
      programmatically determined, values that can be set by the user can be 
      programmatically set, and notification of changes to these items is 
      available to user agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      And if you use applets and scripts (Priority 2)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      6.4: For scripts and applets, ensure that event handlers are input 
      device-independent. 2.1.1 All functionality of the content is operable in 
      a non-time-dependent manner through a keyboard interface, except where the 
      task requires analog, time-dependent input. (Level 1) 
      Note: This does not preclude and should not discourage the support of 
      other input methods (such as a mouse) in addition to keyboard operation.
      2.1.2 All functionality of the content is operable in a non-time-dependent 
      manner through a keyboard interface. (Level 3) 
      Note: Device-independent event handlers are not explicitly required. 
      7.3: Until user agents allow users to freeze moving content, avoid 
      movement in pages. The "until user agents" clause has been satisfied, so 
      it is no longer necessary to avoid movement altogether, as long as authors 
      do not do anything to interfere with the user's ability to pause the 
      content. The prohibition has therefore been replaced with this success 
      criterion 2.2.3
      2.2.3 Content can be paused by the user unless the timing or movement is 
      part of an activity where timing or movement is essential. (Level 2) 
      8.1: Make programmatic elements such as scripts and applets directly 
      accessible or compatible with assistive technologies [Priority 1 if 
      functionality is important and not presented elsewhere, otherwise Priority 
      2.] 4.1.2 For all user interface components, the name and role can be 
      programmatically determined, values that can be set by the user can be 
      programmatically set, and notification of changes to these items is 
      available to user agents, including assistive technologies. (Level 1) 
      4.2.1 At least one version of the content meets all level 1 success 
      criteria, but alternate version(s) that do not meet all level 1 success 
      criteria may be available from the same URI. (Level 1) 
      4.2.2 Content meets the following criteria even if the content uses a 
      technology that is not in the chosen baseline: (Level 1) 
        If content can be entered using the keyboard, then the content can be 
        exited using the keyboard.
        Content conforms to success criterion 2.3.1 (general and red flash).
      9.2: Ensure that any element that has its own interface can be operated in 
      a device-independent manner. 2.1.1 All functionality of the content is 
      operable in a non-time-dependent manner through a keyboard interface, 
      except where the task requires analog, time-dependent input. (Level 1) 
      Note: This does not preclude and should not discourage the support of 
      other input methods (such as a mouse) in addition to keyboard operation.
      2.1.2 All functionality of the content is operable in a non-time-dependent 
      manner through a keyboard interface. (Level 3) 
      9.3: For scripts, specify logical event handlers rather than 
      device-dependent event handlers. 2.1.1 All functionality of the content is 
      operable in a non-time-dependent manner through a keyboard interface, 
      except where the task requires analog, time-dependent input. (Level 1) 
      Note: This does not preclude and should not discourage the support of 
      other input methods (such as a mouse) in addition to keyboard operation.
      2.1.2 All functionality of the content is operable in a non-time-dependent 
      manner through a keyboard interface. (Level 3) 

Priority 3 checkpoints
      In General (Priority 3)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      4.2: Specify the expansion of each abbreviation or acronym in a document 
      where it first occurs. 3.1.4 A mechanism for finding the expanded form of 
      abbreviations is available. (Level 3) 
      4.3: Identify the primary natural language of a document. 3.1.1 The 
      primary natural language or languages of the Web unit can be 
      programmatically determined. (Level 1) 
      9.4: Create a logical tab order through links, form controls, and objects. 
      2.4.6 When a Web unit or authored component is navigated sequentially, 
      components receive focus in an order that follows relationships and 
      sequences in the content. (Level 3) 
      9.5: Provide keyboard shortcuts to important links (including those in 
      client-side image maps), form controls, and groups of form controls. 
      Accesskeys are no longer required for conformance to WCAG 2.0. It is an 
      advisory item: Providing access keys (optional technique for SC 2.4.1 
      (level 1)). 
      10.5: Until user agents (including assistive technologies) render adjacent 
      links distinctly, include non-link, printable characters (surrounded by 
      spaces) between adjacent links. Note: This technique is no longer needed 
      for user agents but may be useful for people with cognitive disabilities. 
      11.3: Provide information so that users may receive documents according to 
      their preferences (e.g., language, content type, etc.) This checkpoint 
      does not map to any WCAG 2.0 success criterion, though certain aspects may 
      map to certain success criteria or to advisory item (see Situation B under 
      How to Meet Success Criterion 4.2.1, for example). Content negotiation is 
      discussed briefly in "Conformance to Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
      2.0."
      13.5: Provide navigation bars to highlight and give access to the 
      navigation mechanism. This checkpoint is not required by any success 
      criterion in WCAG 2.0. It is a possible strategy to address SC 2.4.2 
      (level 2). If navigation bars are used, SC 3.2.3 (level 2) applies.
      3.2.3 Navigational mechanisms that are repeated on multiple Web units 
      within a set of Web units or other primary resources occur in the same 
      relative order each time they are repeated, unless a change is initiated 
      by the user. (Level 2) 
      13.6: Group related links, identify the group (for user agents), and, 
      until user agents do so, provide a way to bypass the group. 2.4.1 A 
      mechanism is available to bypass blocks of content that are repeated on 
      multiple Web units. (Level 1) 
      Note: In WCAG 2.0, this requirement applies only to groups that are 
      repeated on multiple delivery units. 
      13.7: If search functions are provided, enable different types of searches 
      for different skill levels and preferences. Note: This checkpoint does not 
      directly map to any WCAG 2.0 Success Criterion and is not required. Some 
      aspects relate to 2.4.2 (level 2) and 2.5.4 (level 3) as well as advisory 
      items in Understanding WCAG 2.0. 
      13.8: Place distinguishing information at the beginning of headings, 
      paragraphs, lists, etc. This checkpoint is not required by any Success 
      Criterion in WCAG 2.0. . Part of this maps to optional techniqueStarting 
      section headings with unique information for SC 2.4.5 (level 3). 
      13.9: Provide information about document collections (i.e., documents 
      comprising multiple pages.) This checkpoint is not in WCAG 2.0 but does 
      relate to SC 2.4.7 (level 3) and would appear in advisory items in 
      Understanding WCAG 2.0.
      13.10: Provide a means to skip over multi-line ASCII art. This item is not 
      required by any Success Criterion in WCAG 2.0. ASCII art is considered 
      non-text content and is therefore covered by SC 1.1.1. 
      14.2: Supplement text with graphic or auditory presentations where they 
      will facilitate comprehension of the page. This checkpoint is not required 
      by any WCAG 2.0 Success Criterion. Providing visual illustrations of 
      complex ideas, events, and processes and Providing a spoken version of the 
      text are listed as is a technique that can be used to satisfy WCAG 2.0 SC 
      3.1.5 (level 3). 
      14.3: Create a style of presentation that is consistent across pages. 
      Aspects of WCAG 1.0 Checkpoint 14.3 are required by WCAG 2.0 Guideline 
      3.2.3 (level 2), 3.2.4 (level 2). There is no Success Criterion in WCAG 
      2.0 that is as broad as WCAG 1.0 Checkpoint 14.3, so aspects of it do not 
      relate.
      And if you use images and image maps (Priority 3)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      1.5: Until user agents render text equivalents for client-side image map 
      links, provide redundant text links for each active region of a 
      client-side image map. This is no longer required because user agents now 
      render text alternatives for client-side image map areas. 
      And if you use tables (Priority 3)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      5.5: Provide summaries for tables. This is no longer required for 
      conformance. However, in layout tables, the summary attribute must be 
      omitted or empty. See Failure of SC 1.3.1 due to using th elements, 
      caption elements, or non-empty summary attributes in layout tables.
      5.6: Provide abbreviations for header labels.This is no longer required 
      for conformance, but a potentially useful technique.
      10.3: Until user agents (including assistive technologies) render 
      side-by-side text correctly, provide a linear text alternative (on the 
      current page or some other) for all tables that lay out text in parallel, 
      word-wrapped columns. WCAG 1.0 Checkpoint 10.3 is no longer required for 
      conformance to WCAG 2.0.
      1.3.3 When the sequence of the content affects its meaning, that sequence 
      can be programmatically determined. (Level 1) 
      2.4.6 When a Web unit or authored component is navigated sequentially, 
      components receive focus in an order that follows relationships and 
      sequences in the content. (Level 3) 
      And if you use forms (Priority 3)WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria
      10.4 Until user agents handle empty controls correctly, include default, 
      place-holding characters in edit boxes and text areas. This "until user 
      agents" condition is now met and this checkpoint is no longer required. 

New Level 1 requirements in WCAG 2.0 not mapped above
Guideline 2.5
2.5.1 If an input error is detected, the error is identified and described to 
the user in text. (Level 1) 
New Level 2 requirements in WCAG 2.0 not mapped above
Guideline 1.3
1.3.4 Information that is conveyed by variations in presentation of text is also 
conveyed in text, or the variations in presentation of text can be 
programmatically determined. (Level 2) 
1.3.5 Information required to understand and operate content does not rely on 
shape, size, visual location, or orientation of components. (Level 2) 
Guideline 1.4
1.4.2 A mechanism is available to turn off background audio that plays 
automatically, without requiring the user to turn off all audio. (Level 2) 
Guideline 2.4
2.4.3 Web units have titles. (Level 2) 
Guideline 2.5
2.5.2 If an input error is detected and suggestions for correction are known and 
can be provided without jeopardizing the security or purpose of the content, the 
suggestions are provided to the user. (Level 2) 
2.5.3 For forms that cause legal or financial transactions to occur, that modify 
or delete data in data storage systems, or that submit test responses, at least 
one of the following is true: (Level 2) 
  Actions are reversible.
  Actions are checked for input errors before going on to the next step in the 
  process.
  The user is able to review and confirm or correct information before 
  submitting it.
New Level 3 requirements in WCAG 2.0 not mapped above
Guideline 1.2
1.2.5 Sign language interpretation is provided for multimedia. (Level 3) 
1.2.7 For prerecorded multimedia, a full multimedia text alternative including 
any interaction is provided. (Level 3) 
Guideline 1.4
1.4.4 Audio content does not contain background sounds, background sounds can be 
turned off, or background sounds are at least 20 decibels lower than the 
foreground audio content, with the exception of occasional sound effects. (Level 
3) 
Note: A 20 decibel difference in sound level is roughly four times (4x) quieter 
or louder. Background sound that meets this requirement will be approximately 
four times (4x) quieter than the foreground audio content.
Guideline 2.2
2.2.4 Except for real-time events, timing is not an essential part of the event 
or activity presented by the content. (Level 3) 
2.2.5 Interruptions, such as updated content, can be postponed or suppressed by 
the user, except interruptions involving an emergency. (Level 3) 
2.2.6 When an authenticated session expires, the user can continue the activity 
without loss of data after re-authenticating. (Level 3) 
Guideline 2.4
2.4.5 Titles, headings, and labels are descriptive. (Level 3) 
Guideline 2.5
2.5.4 Context-sensitive help is available for text input. (Level 3) 
Guideline 3.1
3.1.3 A mechanism is available for identifying specific definitions of words or 
phrases used in an unusual or restricted way, including idioms and jargon. 
(Level 3) 
3.1.6 A mechanism is available for identifying specific pronunciation of words 
where meaning cannot be determined without pronunciation. (Level 3) 
Guideline 4.2
4.2.4 Content implemented using technologies outside of the chosen baseline 
satisfies all Level 1 and Level 2 requirements supported by the technologies. 
(Level 3) 
Appendix E: References (Non-Normative)
This section is informative.
  WCAG20 
  "Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0," B. Caldwell, W. Chisholm, J. 
  Slatin, and G. Vanderheiden, eds., W3C Last Call Working Draft 27 April 2006. 
  This W3C Working Draft is available at 
  http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/WD-WCAG20-20060427/. The latest version of WCAG 2.0 
  is available at http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 
  UAAG10 
  "User Agent Accessibility Guidelines 1.0," I. Jacobs, J. Gunderson, E. Hansen, 
  eds., W3C Recommendation 17 December 2002. The latest version of UAAG 1.0 is 
  available at http://www.w3.org/TR/UAAG10/ 
  UNESCO 
  International Standard Classification of Education, 1997. A copy of the 
  standard is available at 
  http://www.unesco.org/education/information/nfsunesco/doc/isced_1997.htm. 
  UNICODE 
  The Unicode Consortium. The Unicode Standard, Version 4.0.1, defined by: The 
  Unicode Standard, Version 4.0 (Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley, 2003. ISBN 
  0-321-18578-1), as amended by Unicode 4.0.1 
  (http://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode4.0.1/). 
  OFCOM 
  Guidance Notes, Section 2: Harm and offence Annex 1, "Ofcom Guidance Note on 
  Flashing Images and Regular Patterns in Television (Re-issued as Ofcom Notes 
  25 July 2005)" available at 
  http://www.ofcom.org.uk/tv/ifi/guidance/bguidance/guidance2.pdf) 